Two-colour composite image of comet 2I/Borisov captured by the Gemini North telescope on September 10, 2019. Gemini Observatory/NSF/AURAOn August 30, this year we learned of a second interstellar visitor passing through the Solar System, after the discovery of asteroid ‘Oumuamua last year. The new visitor, comet 21/Borisov, is named after its discoverer, amateur astronomer Gennady Borisov. While ‘Oumuamua's general properties appear unlike anything we have seen before, comet Borisov is unexpectedly familiar.As reported in Nature Astronomy, the interstellar body is similar in composition and size to comets from our own Solar System, suggesting that these objects likely form in the same way elsewhere in the universe. It appears to be dusty, with a red hue, and has a nucleus of about 1 kilometer (0.6 miles). It would be quite an unexceptional object if its origin didn’t lie beyond the edges of the Solar System.When 2I/Borisov was discovered it was over 400 million kilometers (250 million miles) from the Sun. Since then, it has got closer and closer. On October 26, it will cross the orbital plane of the Solar System with a 40-degree angle. This peculiar direction combined with the exceptional speed of 150,000 kilometers (93,000 miles) per hour were the first clues that this body was not from around here. The paper points out that without the orbital characteristics, based on the current observations it would look indistinguishable from Solar System comets.‘We immediately noticed the familiar coma and tail that were not seen around ‘Oumuamua’, said Michał Drahus, from the Jagiellonian University in Poland, in a statement. "This is really cool because it means that our new visitor is one of these mythical and never-before-seen “real” interstellar comets."We should soon find out if there’s anything peculiar about this comet. It will reach its closest point to the Sun on December 8, when it will be roughly 300 million kilometers (190 million miles) away, and more detailed observations of the object are expected to deliver more information on its properties.“The comet is still emerging from the Sun’s morning glare and growing in brightness. It will be observable for several months, which makes us believe that the best is yet to come,” added co-author Wacław Waniak.The images of the comet, which show a yellowish body, have given astronomers plenty of insights. They were taken between September 10-13 with the William Herschel Telescope in Spain and Gemini North Telescope in Hawaii. They also discovered that currently dust is being ejected from the comet at a relatively low speed of 44 meters per second (98 miles per hour).The team has still got time booked on the Gemini North Telescope and they have also booked a large slot with the European Southern Observatory’s Very Large Telescope, in the hope of learning more about 2I/Borisov.“We can safely say that research on this body will be transformative for planetary astronomy and a milestone for astronomy in general,” lead author Piotr Guzik stated.
Artist's impression of the black hole. John PaiceBlack holes are by definition black; they do not emit light directly because nothing can escape them. When we observe them, we look at active black holes. Their strong gravity packed into a tiny space is capable of producing some truly remarkable emissions. One such example is MAXI J1820+070, a system where a black hole and a star orbit around each other. This black hole, which has a mass of about seven Suns, is stealing material from its companion. As this material gets closer to the black hole it heats up and gets compressed, which makes it start to shine. This light emission flickers and researchers have now described their observations of these very quick changes in the Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society.The team used their observations to construct a movie of the flickering light, which includes an animation of the black hole system. The video shows that the material’s glimmering and crackling could easily outshine the star it was stolen from. This was possible thanks to the HiPERCAM and NICER instruments, which detect optical light and X-rays respectively, that captured the changes at over 300 frames per second.“The movie was made using real data, but slowed down to 1/10th of actual speed to allow the most rapid flares to be discerned by the human eye,” lead author John Paice, a graduate researcher at the University of Southampton, said in a statement. “We can see how the material around the black hole is so bright, it’s outshining the star that it is consuming, and the fastest flickers last only a few milliseconds – that’s the output of a hundred Suns and more being emitted in the blink of an eye!”The work is more than just a pretty visualization of black hole-related phenomena. It is also very important for understanding how black holes work. The observations show that the X-ray emission from the system dips as the visible light emission increases, and vice-versa. This is not the first detection of this kind, but it has never been seen at this level of detail before.“The fact that we now see this in three systems strengthens the idea that it is a unifying characteristic of such growing black holes. If true, this must be telling us something fundamental about how plasma flows around black holes operate,” co-author Dr Poshak Gandhi, also at Southampton University, explained. “Our best ideas invoke a deep connection between inspiralling and outflowing bits of the plasma. But these are extreme physical conditions that we cannot replicate in Earth laboratories, and we don’t understand how nature manages this. Such data will be crucial for homing in on the correct theory.”
Mars in all its red glory. NASADuring the 1970s, NASA sent the two Viking landers to Mars. The mission provided incredible insights into the Red Planet and also delivered some surprising results. One experiment gave the first possible hint that we'd detected traces of life on Mars. Back then the evidence was found inconclusive, but one of the experimenters, Dr Gilbert Levin, says that he’s convinced that we did find alien life back then. His ideas are published in Scientific American.The experiment, called Labeled Release (LR), had a moderately simple setup. A sample of Martian soil was given a drop of diluted nutrients tagged with a radioactive carbon isotope. If lifeforms were emitting carbon dioxide on Mars, they would release the radioactive tag and the experiment would detect it.Both Viking landers conducted the experiment. One collected a sunlight-exposed sample, the other collected a sample from under a rock. Both experiments reported a detection. The experiment was then repeated after a week using the same sample, but this time, nothing was detected. In 1976, Levin and his partner in the experiment Dr Patricia Ann Straat deemed the results inconclusive.Given that the Viking Molecular Analysis Experiment failed to detect organic matter, NASA concluded that whatever caused the LR detection was a chemical reaction mimicking life. Over the last few years, Levin and Straat have actually reconsidered the findings, arguing that this was our first detection of alien life, and noting that this and many other findings from the last 43 years make life on Mars a strong possibility.“What is the evidence against the possibility of life on Mars? The astonishing fact is that there is none," Levin writes in Scientific American. "Furthermore, laboratory studies have shown that some terrestrial microorganisms could survive and grow on Mars.” While we cannot take a lack of contrary evidence as proof that there is indeed life on Mars, Levin is right in saying that the possibility of it cannot be discounted. Levin also argues that NASA should conduct an LR-type experiment again. The next Mars mission hasn’t got one on board, but maybe the next one should.“In keeping with well-established scientific protocol, I believe an effort should be made to put life detection experiments on the next Mars mission possible,” Levin writes. “I and my co-experimenter have formally and informally proposed that the LR experiment, amended with an ability to detect chiral metabolism, be sent to Mars to confirm the existence of life: non-biological chemical reactions do not distinguish between 'left-handed' and 'right-handed' organic molecules, but all living things do.”The existence of life on Mars is a subject of study, speculation, and often science fiction, which has been debated for at least 140 years. We are yet to have certainty about the existence of life on the Red Planet, but maybe some proof has already been discovered.
This Hubble image shows the dwarf galaxy IC 4870. This dwarf galaxy has an active supermassive black hole. NASA/ESA/HSTAt the core of almost every galaxy, there is a supermassive black hole. While these behemoths spend most of their lives placid and quiet, once they get an influx of material they can produce jets that create powerful winds that spread throughout their host galaxy.These processes shape galaxies both big and small, but a new study shows that diminutive objects are more strongly affected by supermassive black holes. The strong winds produced by the black holes are stunting the evolution of dwarf galaxies by suppressing star formation.Dwarf galaxies are galaxies that have between 100 million and just a few billion stars. They are the most common type of galaxy and often orbit larger galaxies. The Milky Way, for scale, has between 200 billion and 400 billion stars. In the study, published in The Astrophysical Journal, the team looked at 50 dwarf galaxies, 29 of which had some hallmarks of having an active black hole at their core. They found that 13 of these galaxies were actually losing gas into intergalactic space, with the gas outflow moving faster than the galaxy’s escape velocity. Nine of them have an active supermassive black hole at their core and in six of these, the gas outflow was, without a doubt, being pushed out by the black hole.“Dwarf galaxies are the smallest galaxies in which we are directly seeing winds—gas flows up to 1,000 kilometers per second—for the first time," first author Christina M. Manzano-King, from UC Riverside, said in a statement."What's interesting is that these winds are being pushed out by active black holes in the six dwarf galaxies rather than by stellar processes such as supernovae. Typically, winds driven by stellar processes are common in dwarf galaxies and constitute the dominant process for regulating the amount of gas available in dwarf galaxies for forming stars."Galactic winds are a double-edged sword when it comes to star formation. The winds compress the gas as they move out from the black hole, which can help star formation. But they can also disrupt it, as they disperse the gas from the center of the galaxy, making it unavailable for the next generation of stars."In these six cases, the wind has a negative impact on star formation," co-author Laura Sales, an assistant professor of physics and astronomy at UC Riverside, revealed. "Theoretical models for the formation and evolution of galaxies have not included the impact of black holes in dwarf galaxies. We are seeing evidence, however, of suppression of star formation in these galaxies."The researchers were surprised that the signals they detected, thanks to the Keck telescopes in Hawaii, were so clear.  "We expected we would need observations with much higher resolution and sensitivity, and we had planned on obtaining these as a follow-up to our initial observations," said Gabriela Canalizo, a professor of physics and astronomy at UC Riverside, who led the research team. "But we could see the signs strongly and clearly in the initial observations. The winds were stronger than we had anticipated."The research show that supermassive black holes are very important regulators of star-formation. The team now plans to study the amount of gas and the momentum of these outflows to better understand their wider impact.  
The MIlky Way and the Large and Small Magellanic Cloud. Peter Gudella/ShutterstockLarge galaxies like the Milky Way do not roam the cosmos alone. Instead, they are surrounded by many smaller companion galaxies. The largest satellite of the Milky Way is called the Large Magellanic Cloud (LMC), and it should be big enough to have its own satellites – but these satellites don’t seem to be there.A team of astronomers think they have worked out why. Some of the Milky Way's more than 50 satellite galaxies were actually stolen from the Large Magellanic Cloud. According to the study published in the Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society, two well-known galaxies called Carina and Fornax and four ultra-faint dwarf galaxies were “kidnapped” by the Milky Way.  The Milky Way and the Large Magellanic Cloud are in a complex cosmic waltz that will eventually lead to them merging. The discovery that these dwarf galaxies used to belong to the LMC gives researchers new insights into this process.“The high number of tiny dwarf galaxies seems to suggest the dark matter content of the LMC is quite large, meaning the Milky Way is undergoing the most massive merger in its history, with the LMC, its partner, bringing in as much as one third of the mass in the Milky Way’s dark matter halo – the halo of invisible material that surrounds our galaxy,” lead author Ethan Jahn, a graduate researcher at UC Riverside, said in a statement.The study used the sophisticated European Space Agency’s Gaia, a space observatory that is collecting the position and velocity of millions of stars. With that, they were able to reconstruct the history of the system over the last billion years. In this picture, the Milky Way’s gravitational pull took in the Large Magellanic Cloud along with its seven companions, including the ones from the study and the Small Magellanic Cloud, which is currently in a complex interaction with the LMC.“These results are an important confirmation of our cosmological models, which predict that small dwarf galaxies in the universe should also be surrounded by a population of smaller fainter galaxy companions,” added team leader and co-author Laura Sales, an assistant professor of physics and astronomy at UC riverside. “This is the first time that we are able to map the hierarchy of structure formation to such faint and ultrafaint dwarfs.”
ustas7777777/ShutterstockA new study that used genetic information from the UK Biobank and personal genetics company 23andMe has reported that a curious genetic condition, uniparental disomy, might be more common than previously thought. Most people with this condition are likely unaware of it and researchers say that while in some cases it can lead to serious health conditions, others might live a perfectly healthy life unaware of it.DNA, the blueprint of what makes us us, is stored in the nucleus of each cell in our body. It's packaged in structures known as chromosomes and most of us have 46, divided into 23 pairs. Usually, we get 23 from our mothers and 23 from our fathers. But not always.Uniparental disomy or UDP is one of the conditions where this doesn’t happen. In UDP, one or more chromosome pairs come from just one of the parents instead of a copy from each. This condition was only discovered in 1987, and it was believed to be quite rare. Over the last decade, researchers have been reconsidering if this is actually the case, and suggested that the low incidence rate was actually down to a lack of study.Now new research published in The American Journal of Human Genetics shows that they were likely right. Previous research suggested that it occurs between one in 3,500 and one in 5,000 people. This new research places the rate of UPD at about one in 2,000. “So that’s about twice as common as was previously thought,” lead author Priyanka Nakka, a postdoctoral research fellow at Boston Children’s Hospital and former 23andMe intern, told Gizmodo UK.The team looked at markers of UPD across 4.4 million consenting research participants from the personal genetics company 23andMe, as well as 431,094 UK Biobank participants. They found 675 people across both groups that have UPD. To establish the incidence rate they looked specifically at parents and their offspring within the database. They found 105 cases among the 214,915 that matched the criteria.The study provides interesting insights into this genetic condition, and raises the possibility that it may occur more often than we thought, but there are limitations to the study. For example, 23andMe is a private company, so the sample subjects are not representative of the general population. That said, employing such a large database showed up no particular correlation between UPD and deleterious health traits, between which it had been thought there was a link.
The Milky Way is gaining weight, it turns out. Avigator Fortuner/ShutterstockGalaxies are not isolated systems, they are actually very open. Stars come in and fly out, gas flows in and is pushed out, and sometimes other galaxies just smash into them. This is happening everywhere in the universe and it got researchers wondering, is the Milky Way gaining or losing mass or is it keeping its books balanced?As reported in a paper accepted by The Astrophysical Journal, researchers studied the flow of gas around our galaxies to find out. They estimate that our galaxy loses about 53,000 Earth's worth of gas each year, but gains over three times as much: 176,000 Earths, or 53 percent of the mass of the Sun. This was quite a surprise for the researchers."We expected to find the Milky Way's books balanced, with an equilibrium of gas inflow and outflow, but 10 years of Hubble ultraviolet data has shown there is more coming in than going out," lead author Andrew Fox of the Space Telescope Science Institute, Baltimore, said in a statement.Most of the gas being siphoned by our galaxy is from the intergalactic medium, but the team suspects that some could be coming from the small satellite galaxies that surround the Milky Way. Our galaxy has already cannibalized some of its companions, so stealing from them is really not a big deal.The observations were possible thanks to Hubble’s Cosmic Origins Spectrograph (COS), which was installed in the last servicing mission in 2009. The gas is very diffuse, making it invisible, so the team used the light of distant quasars to work out the properties of these gas clouds. The 200 observations of the diffused gas halo provided them with enough data to paint this peculiar picture of the Milky Way."Studying our own galaxy in detail provides the basis for understanding galaxies across the universe, and we have realized that our galaxy is more complicated than we imagined," co-author Philipp Richter of the University of Potsdam in Germany, added.
Shackleton Crater, the floor of which is permanently shadowed from the sun, appears to be home to deposits of water ice. A new study sheds light on how old these and other deposits on the Moon's south pole might be. NASA/GSFC/Arizona State UniversityThe surface of the lunar south pole is riddled with ancient craters covered in ice, but how this water first appeared on the moon has long been a mystery. Now, a team of researchers believe these icy pockets could be the result of multiple events that rained down ancient water-bearing objects.Due to the unique tilt of the moon, its polar regions are permanently shadowed and receive no direct sunlight. Extremely low surface temperatures have helped to preserve the ice, but it is not well understood how it got to the moon in the first place.To determine the age of the ice, researchers first aged 20 craters found at the lunar south pole using data from NASA’s Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter (LRO), which has been orbiting and collecting images of the moon for the last decade. Older craters showed more signs of wear around the edges, as well as pockmarks from asteroids or comets that may have struck the surface over time.“The ages of these deposits can potentially tell us something about the origin of the ice, which helps us understand the sources and distribution of water in the inner solar system,” study lead author Ariel Deutsch in a statement. “For exploration purposes, we need to understand the lateral and vertical distributions of these deposits to figure out how best to access them. These distributions evolve with time, so having an idea of the age is important.”Most of the ice was found in craters that formed more than 3 billion years ago. Because the ice can’t be older than the crater, the scientists say that the ice is at most the same age. In these older, larger craters, the ice was also patchy due to bombardments from asteroids and comets over time. Newer, smoother ice was found in more recent craters as well. It’s believed that this young ice might have made its way to the moon in a different way than the old ice.And if the ice is, in fact, different ages, then it means it likely came from two different sources.But how did it get there? When the moon was still young, it was hit by “relatively high impact rates of comets and asteroids” delivering ice with them, wrote the authors in the journal Icarus. It’s believed that perhaps the older ice found in the ancient craters likely came from this source, whereas the younger ice may have been delivered to the moon either by micrometeorites or through interactions with the solar wind.But the only way to know for sure is to collect samples from the moon for future analysis.“When we think about sending humans back to the Moon for long-term exploration, we need to know what resources are there that we can count on, and we currently don’t know,” said study co-author Jim Head. “Studies like this one help us make predictions about where we need to go to answer those questions.”
Vadim Sadovski/ShutterstockIt’s mid-September 2084. Thanks to politicians listening to activists and scientists, we have avoided the worse of the climate crisis. You’re enjoying a nice cup of tea on your patio, and then bam! An asteroid explodes overhead. Your morning is ruined.Alright, we let ourselves get carried away with that fantasy (especially the part about the politicians), but a newly discovered building-sized asteroid, 2019 SU3, will indeed have a close encounter with our planet in 65 years. Based on the current orbital parameters, it will be within 10,000 kilometers (6,000 miles) from the surface of the planet.The chance that it will actually hit our planet is between unlikely and very unlikely, with the most pessimistic scenario giving it a one in 147 chance, while others suggest that it is more of a one in 3,600 chance. The European Space Agency has added 2019 SU3 to the list of risky objects simply to make sure to refine the measurements.Uncertainties are all too common when it comes to predicting the orbits of asteroids in the far future. For example, the date is not set in stone, with the tentative timing between September 16 and September 21, 2084. The estimations for the future movements are based on 124 observations and more are needed. Luckily, it will come close (but not dangerously close) several more times before 2084.So what would happen if the object was actually on a collision course with Earth? Well, it would likely produce a bolide similar to the Chelyabinsk meteor that exploded over Russia in 2013. The size estimates for 2019 SU3 put it at between 9 and 23 meters (30 to 75 feet) – roughly the expected size of the Russian object.The Chelyabinsk asteroid burned up high in the atmosphere, with the shockwave it produced damaging over 7,000 buildings and injuring 1,491 people from the glass of exploded windows.While it might not be an extremely dangerous object, 2019 SU3 is another reminder of how much we don’t know about the space rocks out there. It was only discovered on September 23, a few hours before it passed close to Earth.
taffpixture/shutterstockIndia's Chandrayaan-2 lunar orbiter is hard at work studying the surface of the Moon. ISRO, the Indian Space Research Organization, has released some images and new data collected by the craft, pointing out that the new pictures are the sharpest ever taken from orbit.The images were taken on September 5 and cover part of the Boguslawsky E crater, which is 14 kilometers (8.7 miles) across and 3 kilometers (1.9 miles) deep. This is one of the 14 satellite craters of the much larger Boguslawsky crater. Each satellite has a capital letter after its name, with the letters ordered to denote distance from the main one.Chandrayaan-2 used its Orbiter High-Resolution Camera to snap the photos from an altitude of 100 kilometers (62 miles). The image covers a swath of a few kilometers and has an incredible spatial resolution of 25 centimeters (9.8 inches), enough to spot meter-sized boulders and craters that mark the desolate surface of our natural satellite. NASA's LRO has a similar high-resolution capability but the final images aren't always as sharp. The high-resolution images will be key to achieving one of the mission's goals – to map the lunar surface with even more detail than before to construct 3D maps. One of the mission's other objectives is strongly connected to the subject of the released photos. The region photographed by the craft is near the lunar south pole which is of particular interest for scientists because it is rich in water.The Indian mission will use its radar to study the distribution of water ice on the south polar region and measure the thickness of the lunar regolith, the fine dust soil that covers the Moon.ISRO has also released data from its CLASS instrument, an X-ray spectrometer. It studied the elemental composition of lunar soils by detecting X-rays emitted by the Sun bouncing off the lunar surface. For this reason, it works best during solar flares.But the instrument doesn’t sit idle when the Sun is quiet. The team uses it to measure the number of particles encountered by the Moon in the six days that it crosses the geotail, the magnetic field of the Earth stretching away from the Sun. The preliminary data shows a 10-fold increase in particles in this region of space, suggesting a complex interplay between electrically charged particles and the magnetic field.
 Alexyz3d/ShutterstockIt appears this week is a particularly busy one in the space around our planet. NASA’s Center for Near-Earth Object Studies reports that 11 objects will be flying past Earth before Sunday. None of them is a risk that warrants worry.The closest object is 2019 SL7, flying 571,443 kilometers (355,078 miles) past Earth. This is about 40 percent further out than the Moon. The object is between 18 and 40 meters (59 to 131 feet) in diameter, slightly larger than the object that exploded over the Russian city of Chelyabinsk in 2013.If such an object were to fall to Earth, it would likely produce devastation at a local level, although its exact extent would depend on its density and whether or not it hits the ground. For example, the Russian bolide exploded at an altitude of 29.7 kilometers (18.5 miles), with the shock wave powerful enough to damage over 7,200 buildings, including the roof of a factory.The furthest object to pass by Earth is 2019 SE2. At its closest approach, it will be 7.7 million kilometers (4.8 million miles) away. The object will also be one of the biggest in the group, with estimates ranging from 41 to 92 meters (135 to 302 feet). A potentially bigger object is 2019 SX5, with its size ranging from as large as 140 meters or as “small” as 62 meters (459 to 203 feet). Such an object could cause devastation at a regional level, but luckily it will get no closer than 7.15 million kilometers (4.442 million miles).Eleven asteroids flying "close" to our planet might seem like a lot, but it's common for there to be a handful of space rocks moving about. What’s a bit more peculiar is to have a large number of these close encounters known well in advance.Last September 21, nine near-Earth objects flew close to our planet. Yet on the day, we only knew about four of them; two of these fours were discovered just the day before. The other five objects were discovered in the days following the close pass. Such events continue to show just how much we still don’t know about the minor objects of the solar system.
Simulation of the formation of the giant star Tau Scorpii. The colors indicate the strength of the magnetic field. Ohlmann/Schneider/RöpkeMagnetars are a type of neutron star which, as their name suggests, have very powerful magnetic fields. The defining feature of these stars has defied explanation, but a team of astronomers think they have the answer by solving an even older problem, the source of magnetism in some massive main-sequence stars. Collisions between stars create magnetic fields, they argue, which survive the supernova explosion and intensify in the transformation to neutron star status.Even ordinary neutron stars involve physics of the extreme, denser than an atomic nucleus with a cupful containing as much mass as Mount Everest.However, from 1979 onwards astronomers started detecting behavior they initially could not explain, such as soft gamma-ray repeaters, which erratically release radiation less energetic than other gamma-ray bursts, and anomalous X-ray pulsars. In 1992 it was suggested that what was being observed would make sense if some neutron stars were both hypermagnetic and rotated particularly fast, leaving open the question of where the magnetism comes from.Dr Fabian Schneider of Heidelberg University, Germany moved the question back a step. Like other neutron stars, magnetars are a consequence of supernova explosions in stars 10-29 times the mass of the Sun. Schneider said in a statement: “We know that the Sun has a turbulent envelope in which its magnetic field is continuously generated. But more massive stars do not have such an envelope. Still, about 10 percent have a strong, large-scale surface magnetic field whose origin has eluded us since their discovery in 1947.”In Nature Schneider and colleagues describe advanced computer modeling of the stellar merger thought to have formed Tau Scorpii, a very magnetic star with 15 times the Sun's mass. They showed the turbulence and shear forces produced in the collision lead to powerful magnetic fields.The majority of the galaxy's stars exist in binary systems, and sometimes their orbits decay until they combine, producing one larger star. Around 10 percent of the galaxy's very massive stars have the unusually youthful appearance such mergers produce, which fits well with the highly magnetic proportion.The idea has been around for a while, but Schneider and co-authors provided the computational methods needed to model such a complex event, showing the theory is credible.Pre-supernova, stars like Tau Scorpii are larger than the Sun, afterward, they are the size of a city but retain much of the mass. The shrinkage intensifies the magnetic field, leading to something a hundred million times stronger than anything humans have manufactured.Magnetars only maintain their intense fields for 10,000s of thousands of years – a blink of an eye in a star's life. Consequently, there are many more ex-magnetars in the universe than current ones, but the immense bursts of gamma and X-rays they release when their magnetic field is briefly interrupted means we notice the few there are. Other neutron stars are magnetic, but dramatically less so.
Christina Koch on the first spacewalk to replace batteries aboard the ISS. NASA/TwitterChristina Koch and Jessica Meir will become the first to partake in history’s only all-women spacewalk aboard the International Space Station (ISS) on October 21.The originally planned first all-female spacewalk was canceled last March, when NASA announced it only had one suitably fitting spacesuit for the two women aboard the International Space Station. Instead, both women took part in two separate co-ed spacewalks.The spacesuit that will be worn during the spacewalk is the Extravehicular Mobility Unit (EMU), a specially designed “personal spaceship” of a suit that keeps the astronauts safe in the high-pressure vacuum of space. The spacesuit contains breathing and temperature controls, communication systems, battery power, and offers protection from radiation and space debris. One part of the suit, the hard upper torso (HUT), created the hiccup in the last all-female spacewalk attempt. Both women best fit a medium-sized HUT, but the ISS only had one available.  “Due to a number of factors, ranging from safety to fit and performance, a crewmember may decide in orbit that their size preferences have changed. This is not uncommon, as astronauts’ bodies change on orbit and ground-based training can be different than performing spacewalks in the microgravity environment outside the space station,” wrote NASA in a statement. They added that “when that occurs, the teams on the ground determine what course of action will best accommodate both the astronauts’ preferences and the demands of the space station’s schedule.”The spacewalk is one of the most dangerous tasks that an astronaut will take part in during their time aboard the ISS. Each typically lasts around 6.5 hours while the astronaut remains tethered to their spacecraft to keep from floating away. Just like in the movies, astronauts wear small backpack-sized units complete with jet thrusters operated by a joystick to help them move around safely. The October 21 event is one of 10 spacewalks outside of the ISS that are scheduled to occur over the next few weeks, the first five of which are meant to replace outdated nickel-hydrogen batteries on the space station's truss and the following five to repair the Alpha Magnetic Spectrometer (AMS). The AMS has been attached to the ISS since May 2011 and is used to detect dark matter.  The next nine spacewalks will be live-streamed on NASA television.  
Artistic illustration of the delocalization of the massive molecules used in the experiment. Yaakov Fein, Universität WienEverything is a particle. And everything is a wave. Light? It’s a wave but it is also made of tiny packets of energy known as photons that behave like particles. Electrons? They behave as both particles and waves. This duality has been known about for almost a century, when Louis-Victor de Broglie claimed that all matter had a wave-like nature. And he really meant all matter. Even you have a specific wavelength.The most renowned experiment used to prove this is called the double-slit experiment. It is easy to assemble to show that light is a wave. If you cut two slits in a piece of cardboard and put a flashlight behind it, a beautiful diffraction pattern forms on the other side.This double-slit diffraction also happens with electrons and atoms, and one might wonder how big we can go. New research shows that we can go pretty big. Using a complex experiment, they were able to demonstrate the particle-wave duality of a molecule with 2,000 atoms. These are the heaviest objects to date for which this has been possible. The achievement is reported in Nature Physics.This high-mass molecule is said to be in superposition. For all intents and purposes, this means that the molecule goes through multiple places at once. They are delocalized and for this reason, we see them behave like waves. If you are feeling like “Woah!” or "WTF?", don’t worry that is perfectly normal when talking about quantum mechanics.“Every molecule is in a superposition of possible positions. This is what we abbreviate by 'being in two places at once'. Hot as they are, no two molecules would ever interfere. It is the superposition and interference of paths,” the team stated in a Q&A press release. The results from the experiment were three years in the making, using particular organic molecules and a setup known as a Talbot-Lau interferometer. The wavelength scale is the inverse of the mass so as the mass grows bigger, the wavelength grows smaller, making it more and more difficult to test the interference.But pushing this boundary is important to gain new insight into quantum mechanics and produce a new understanding of its limits in explaining reality.“Quantum physics has been around for 100 years and has been confirmed to be the valid theory of the inanimate nature (excluding gravity) throughout all tests,” the authors write. “However, if quantum objects can be in superposition of two different energies, two positions, two velocities and directions, why don't we see this in our daily lives?”They point to both simple and complex answers for it, but to confirm we will have to go even bigger yet.
Saturn in all its glory. NASA/ESA/A. Simon (GSFC), M.H. Wong (University of California, Berkeley) and the OPAL TeamSaturn is not only "Lord of The Rings" in the Solar System, it now holds the record for planet with the highest number of moons. The discovery of 20 new moons has been announced, taking the number of natural satellites around the ringed giant to 82. Jupiter is now in second place with 79.A team led by Carnegie's Scott Sheppard discovered the moons, which are each roughly 5 kilometers (3 miles across), and significantly farther away from the planet than its more famous satellites Enceladus and Titan. Three of the new moons are prograde, they orbit in the same direction as the planet spins, while the other 17 are retrograde, going against the rotation. You can even be in with a chance of naming them.Like many celestial objects, Saturn's moons are grouped and named for characters from various mythologies. The outer moons of Saturn are divided into three groups: Inuit, Gallic, and Norse, depending on their orbit. Two of the prograde moons belong to the Inuit group, whose names are taken from Inuit mythology. Their orbit is inclined by 46 degrees with respect to the orbit of the planet.The retrograde moons are all part of the same group, the Norse, which have wider orbital inclination but they are all retrograde. The farthest moon of Saturn is now among these newly discovered bodies. Finally the last prograde moon is part of the Gallic group, named for Gallic mythology and inclined around 36 degrees. The most peculiar thing about the new prograde moon is its location. It’s farther out than all the other Gallic moons, and its smack in the middle of the Norse group. Influences from these retrograde moons might have pulled it farther out.In keeping with these names, the new moons will be named after giants from each of the three mythologies, depending on their group.Studying their orbits doesn’t just allow for the classification of these moons, it also gives important insights into their past, and even potential formation scenarios.“This kind of grouping of outer moons is also seen around Jupiter, indicating violent collisions occurred between moons in the Saturnian system or with outside objects such as passing asteroids or comets,” Sheppard said in a statement. “In the Solar System’s youth, the Sun was surrounded by a rotating disk of gas and dust from which the planets were born. It is believed that a similar gas-and-dust disk surrounded Saturn during its formation,” Sheppard said. “The fact that these newly discovered moons were able to continue orbiting Saturn after their parent moons broke apart indicates that these collisions occurred after the planet-formation process was mostly complete and the disks were no longer a factor.”
This computer-simulated image shows a supermassive black hole at the core of a galaxy. NASA, ESA, and D. Coe, J. Anderson, and R. van der Marel (STScI)At the edge of our solar system, some unknown object is manipulating the paths of chunks of ice as they circle the sun.These objects' oval-shaped orbits all point in the same direction and tilt the same way, suggesting that an unseen force is herding them.At first, scientists thought the culprit was a mysterious planet, which they dubbed Planet Nine (though some call it Planet X). But a new paper suggests the gravitational pull could come from a primordial black hole — a type of small black hole that scientists have theorized formed during the Big Bang. Although the existence of primordial black holes has not been confirmed, some scientists think the universe is teeming with them. If they exist, such black holes could make up the 80% of the universe that scientists can't see. They know this "dark matter" exists because its gravity pulls on things throughout the universe.A new paper posted on Tuesday on arXiv, an online repository for research that has not been peer-reviewed, suggests that Planet Nine could be one of these ancient black holes. The researchers proposed new ways to hunt down this mysterious missing piece."Once you start thinking about more exotic objects, like primordial black holes, you think in different ways," James Unwin, a theoretical physicist and co-author of the paper, told Gizmodo. "We advocate that rather than just looking for it in visible light, maybe look for it in gamma rays. Or cosmic rays."Planet 9 Explains Distant Objects' Weird OrbitsAt the fringes of our solar system are thousands of small icy bodies that make up a region astronomers call the Kuiper Belt. Six of those objects appear to have bizarre orbits that indicate some unknown source of gravity is tugging on them.In 2016, computer simulations and mathematical models revealed that the culprit could be a mysterious distant planet we've never seen: Planet Nine. In that study, the planetary scientists Konstantin Batygin and Michael Brown calculated that Planet Nine's gravitational pull means it could have up to 10 times the mass of Earth.On average, the mysterious body orbits the sun at a distance 20 times farther than Neptune — about 18.6 billion miles. It could take between 10,000 and 20,000 years for it to complete one trip around the sun. (Pluto, by comparison, takes 248 years to complete its orbit.)Batygin and Brown suggested that Planet Nine could have formed in the same way as the gas giants we know well — Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, and Neptune — starting as an ice core, then grabbing all the gas around it.Planet Nine may have gotten too close to Jupiter or Saturn, they suggested, and was flung out to the edges of the solar system, where it now follows an eccentric orbit and influences the Kuiper Belt objects.Since the mysterious world exerts such a powerful gravitational force on a large region of the solar system, Brown called it "the most planet-y of the planets in the whole solar system."But that may not be the case.Rather than a planet, it could be a primordial black hole.For the new study, researchers looked at data on the six Kuiper Belt objects' bizarre orbits and also incorporated recent observations about how light traveling through the solar system appears to be bending because of an object (or objects) that scientist haven't accounted for. Both of these strange phenomena are likely caused by the interference of unknown objects, each with similar mass. So a primordial black hole could be to blame for both, the study suggested. It could be one black hole the size of a bowling ball with the mass of 10 Earths, or a number of smaller primordial black holes that add up to that mass. The researchers also said that a dense group of free-floating planets outside our solar system could explain the light bending; by that logic, Planet Nine could be one of those free roamers that was captured by our solar system.Really, Batygin told Gizmodo, Planet Nine could be any kind of low-visibility object with the right mass."Planet Nine could be a five-Earth-mass hamburger," he said. "But a black hole the size of your wallet is a bit harder to find."The scientists behind the new study said that direct observations of the mysterious object ⁠— if astronomers can find it ⁠— could help determine whether it's a planet or black hole. So the hunt for Planet Nine, they suggested, should include a search for moving sources of x-rays, gamma rays, and other types of radiation, since those clues could indicate the edges of a black hole.If scientists detect such signals, they could find out whether Planet Nine has been a black hole all along. Read the original article on Business Insider. Follow us on Facebook and Twitter. Copyright 2017.
ESO/M. Kornmesser/Nick Risinger/NASA, ESA, Jennifer Lotz and the HFF Team (STScI)Members of the Swedish Royal Society of Science have awarded the 2019 Nobel Prize in Physics for contributions to our understanding of the evolution of the universe and Earth’s place in the cosmos. The prize is to be jointly shared between Professor Jim Peebles for theoretical discoveries in physical cosmology, and Michel Mayor and Didier Queloz for the discovery of the first exoplanet orbiting a solar-type star.Peebles' contributions to cosmology are profound. He was among those that predicted the existence of the cosmic microwave background and also worked on other aspects of the Big Bang Theory, like the formation of the first elements in the universe and dark matter.The second half of the prize shifts our focus from understanding the fundamentals of the universe to observing the objects within our own galaxy. On October 6, 1995, just over 24 years ago, swiss astronomers Mayor and Queloz announced the discovery of a planet around the star 51 Pegasi.The discovery was monumental for several reasons. It was the first discovery of an exoplanet around a main-sequence star; previous exoplanetary detections were around pulsars. It also went against the wisdom of the time on how planetary systems should behave.Planet 51 Pegasi b has a mass of at least half of Jupiter but it orbits its star just 7.88 million kilometers (4.9 million miles) away. Astronomers didn’t think that gas giants could be found that close to their parent stars. Since then, among the 4,000+ discovered exoplanets, we have found many examples of these hot Jupiters orbiting very close to their stars.This year's Physics Prize recognizes both aspects of theory and observation in science. As Professor Peebles said in the press conference announcing the Prize: “Theory is empty without observations. We depend on the interaction between the theory and observations.”Given that today is Ada Lovelace Day, it would be remiss not to note that some of the barriers that have kept women and underrepresented groups from attaining long careers and accolades in scientific fields still exist in some places, and this will be reflected in awards marking life-long contributions to a field.  
This animation illustrates how color and displacement maps are used in 3D animation software to paint and model an object like the Moon. NASA/Goddard/Scientific Visualization StudioAn extraordinary animation created by NASA scientists allows you to experience the moon like never before – as a 3D interactive model.The new CGI Moon Kit was created using images captured by the Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter (LRO) as a way to bridge the gap between the extensive data made available by the space agency and the general public. The data used for the images is available online but requires a trained eye to decipher it. Creating interactive tools like the CG Moon Kit allows for the public to view and engage in a meaningful way without feeling inundated, notes NASA.“All of this data is publicly available but not as accessible as it could be. In releasing this in a form that a lot of people can appreciate and use,” said creator Ernie Wright, science visualizer works at the Scientific Visualization Studio at NASA’s Goddard Space Flight Center, in a statement. “Because of this, the importance of connecting this science with art and imagery is crucial for the mission to achieve its full potential.”LRO has spent the last decade orbiting the moon in order to map its surface “like never before”. Wright turned to 10 years’ worth of images captured by a camera aboard the LRO, which works like a scanner to create images line-by-line. As the spacecraft moves, it beams laser pulses that bounce back to the spacecraft. The amount of time it takes a pulse to do so helps researchers to determine the topography of the moon. These images are then sent back to Earth for analyzers like Wright to process.“[The Moon kit] will bring the LRO data within reach of lots of other artists who want to do the kinds of things that I do,” he said.But getting the image is the easy part. Setting the scene is where it gets tricky. Wright says his work requires considering the lighting, location, and the big picture in order to bring everything together.“Using 3D animation software is a lot like filming live-action, with lights, cameras, props, and sets,” said Wright, “but visualization is more like filming a documentary. You’re being factual, but you’re also creating a narrative.”In addition to our viewing pleasure, the maps will also be used to help prepare safe landings for the future Artemis program, a commitment made by the space agency to land American astronauts, including the first woman and the next man, on the moon by 2024.LRO has created beautiful images in the past, including this 681 gigapixels interactive map of the lunar north pole and these “hopping” water molecules.
The cosmic pretzel in all its glory. ALMA (ESO/NAOJ/NRAO), Alves et al.The finer details of how fledgling stars form is shrouded in mystery and, more literally, dust. By using one of the world’s most advanced observatories, however, the mystery is clearing and the dust is coming into focus. And it appears to be shaped like a pretzel.Two baby stars were discovered in the [BHB2007] 11 system located between 600 and 700 light-years from Earth. Using the Atacama Large Millimeter/submillimeter Array (ALMA), astronomers were able to study the distribution of dust around these two stars with incredibly high precision, focusing on the dust both near and far from the objects, publishing their findings in Science.The twin stars are surrounded by stellar disks, each weighing a few times the mass of Jupiter and extending for less than 500 million kilometers (300 million miles). These circumstellar disks are key for stellar evolution, as stars grow by feeding on the material they can steal from them.“We see two compact sources that we interpret as circumstellar disks around the two young stars,” lead author Felipe Alves from the Max Planck Institute for Extraterrestrial Physics, said in a statement. “The size of each of these disks is similar to the asteroid belt in our Solar System and the separation between them is 28 times the distance between the Sun and the Earth.”The "cosmic pretzel" is shaped by the gravitational and electromagnetic forces of the system, and has a mass of roughly 80 Jupiters. The visually striking pretzel-like appearance is actually a complex interlaced stream of dust that surrounds the entire system, and the spiral structures provide details on how the dust feeds onto the stars. The process is not direct; the stars accrete mass from the disk in two stages. The material in the disk is accreted into the stellar disk, in the loops seen imaged by ALMA, and then the stars accrete the material from their circumstellar disks. Data analysis of the image also shows the less massive, brighter circumstellar disk (the lower one in the image) accretes more material. “We expect this two-level accretion process to drive the dynamics of the binary system during its mass accretion phase,” said Alves. “While the good agreement of these observations with theory is already very promising, we will need to study more young binary systems in detail to better understand how multiple stars form.”
Calcium sulfate deposits as seen by Curiosity. These remnants of the salty lakes left behind as Mars dried out are more resistant to erosion than surrounding mudstones, creating the shapes seen here. Rapin et al./Nature GeoscienceWhen lakes on Earth dry out they turn salty, and it makes sense that the same thing happened on Mars. As the Curiosity Mars rover climbs to find younger rocks, it has not only confirmed this, but found some of the salts left behind, a record of the last time life could have flourished, rather than merely survived, on Mars.Gale crater, which Curiosity is exploring, was chosen in part because it offers the opportunity to study sedimentary rocks of different ages layered on top of each other. A paper in Nature Geoscience reports that among these Curiosity has found intermittent clay-bearing deposits containing 30-50 percent calcium sulfate by weight.All these rocks date to the Hesperian period, making them 3.3-3.7 billion years old. Similarly, rich deposits have not been found in the crater’s older rocks.Dr William Rapin of the California Institute of Technology and co-authors attribute the presence of these salts to infiltration of rocks by the waters of the crater’s long-gone lake when it was very salty. Older rocks were also exposed to the lake’s waters, but at the time these were much less salty. Anything much younger never knew the touch of water, although it is still possible Curiosity will find some more recent examples.Like a desert lake on Earth, the waters of Gale crater evaporated, leaving an ever saltier residue, but on Mars, it appears this was an intermittent process lasting 400 million years.Even without water, the rocks have been weathered over the vast span of time since then, and the calcium sulfate-enriched portions are more resistant to erosion, leading to miniature versions of the formations seen in places like Monument Valley, where harder rocks jut up above the terrain.In the midst of the 150 meters (500 feet) of calcium sulfate-enriched strata Curiosity found a 10-meter (33-feet) slope with 26-36 percent magnesium sulfate, but little calcium. Calcium sulfate is less soluble than magnesium sulfate, and the authors think it precipitated out first, with more soluble salts deposited in the final drying stage.“Our findings do not compromise the search for life in Gale crater; terrestrial magnesium sulfate-rich hypersaline lakes are known to accommodate halotolerant biota, and crystallization of sulfate salts may also aid preservation of biosignatures,” the paper notes.
James Josephides/ASTRO 3DSupermassive black holes are found in almost every galaxy in the universe. Some of them are very active, spewing out powerful jets of materials. Others are quiet, living passively. Sagittarius A*, the one at the center of the Milky Way, is in the latter group but it appears that it was briefly more active in the recent past.A new study due to be published in The Astrophysical Journal provides evidence of a sudden explosion from our supermassive black hole roughly 3.5 million years ago. A flare erupted from the center of the Milky Way and it spread out in two enormous cone-shaped bursts of radiation through both the galaxy's poles and out into space. These “ionization cones” are called Seyfert flares, and start with a small diameter near the black hole, expanding as they escape the galaxy.“The flare must have been a bit like a lighthouse beam,” said Professor Joss Bland-Hawthorn, co-author of the study from the University of Sydney in a statement. “Imagine darkness, and then someone switches on a lighthouse beacon for a brief period of time.”Sagittarius A* is located 26,000 light-years from Earth and weighs a whopping 4.6 million times the mass of the Sun. The link with Sagittarius A* is not certain but the team argues that the amount of energy released by the event couldn’t have been produced by anything other than this supermassive black hole. The flare lasted for about 300,000 years, a very short time on a cosmic scale but enough for it to have an effect on the region surrounding our galaxy.The Milky Way doesn’t float alone in the darkness of the cosmos. It's surrounded by smaller galaxies that orbit it like satellites orbiting Earth. The largest and closest are the Magellanic Clouds, a pair of interacting galaxies that are leaving in their trail a stream of high-velocity gas clouds. This Magellanic stream ribbons itself around the poles of the Milky Way and the team behind this study believe that the flare impacted the stream, pushing its gas further out.An artist's impression of the massive bursts of ionizing radiation exploding from the center of the Milky Way and impacting the Magellanic Stream. James Josephides/ASTRO 3D"These results dramatically change our understanding of the Milky Way," co-author Magda Guglielmo, also from the University of Sydney, said. "We always thought about our galaxy as an inactive galaxy, with a not-so-bright center. These new results instead open the possibility of a complete reinterpretation of its evolution and nature."The flare event that occurred 3 million years ago was so powerful that it had consequences on the surrounding of our galaxy. We are the witness to the awakening of the sleeping beauty."
NASA InSight's robotic arm will use its scoop to pin the spacecraft's heat probe. NASA/JPL-CaltechNASA’s InSight mission on Mars has been full of success, for example, the detection of marsquakes over the last few months. But there have also been struggles. One of its instruments, nicknamed the mole, has not been able to successfully move into position. Now the mission team is trying a peculiar new approach.The mole, or, more specifically, Heat Flow and Physical Properties Package (HP3), is a self-hammering heat probe. It is designed to burrow itself up to 5 meters (16 feet) below the surface. Unfortunately, since its placement on February 28, 2019, it has not been able to dig more than 35 centimeters (14 inches). The mission specialists are now using the lander's robotic arm to help to solve the issue.The mole seems to be stuck on a particularly tough piece of soil and it doesn’t seem to be capable of getting enough friction to dig through. Friction is key to the mission's design. Without it, the self-hammering, as has been happening, makes the mole just bounce in its place as it recoils.The team is ready to use a tactic called "pinning." The robotic arm of the lander will be used to steady HP3 and over the next few weeks, they hope that this approach might lead to some digging progress."We're going to try pressing the side of the scoop against the mole, pinning it to the wall of its hole," InSight Deputy Principal Investigator Sue Smrekar, of NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory, said in a statement. "This might increase friction enough to keep it moving forward when mole hammering resumes."The mole found itself in peculiar soil. Based on the data reported by the sensors, HP3 encountered a strange layer of duricrust 5 to 10 centimeters (2-4 inches) thick. When the mole hammers down, the crust clumps rather than falling around the instrument, so the mole has not been able to penetrate this tough layer. This is unlike any soil previously encountered on Mars missions and the mole was not designed for it."All we know about the soil is what we can see in images InSight sends us," said Tilman Spohn, HP3's principal investigator at the German Aerospace Center (DLR). "Since we can't bring the soil to the mole, maybe we can bring the mole to the soil by pinning it in the hole."The team will also use the robotic arm in another way. It will scoop up the soil (its original purpose) and pour it into the hole, hopefully increasing the friction. We hope that these two approaches will be enough for the mole to continue digging.
This is obviously not a real image. Triff/ShutterstockMysterious fireballs streaked across the sky and crash-landed in Chile last week, setting both the ground and curiosity ablaze. What they were and where they came from is still a mystery, as a first analysis has just ruled out the obvious favorite: meteorites.On September 25, witnesses reported seeing blazing fireballs light up the sky over Chiloé Island, in the archipelago off southern Chile. Not long after, small bush fires were reported in seven locations across the island, which were quickly put out by volunteers.The obvious explanation, as astrophysicist and Chilean of the Year, Jose Maza told national broadcaster TVN, was a meteorite or space debris. Residents noted the fireball was moving extremely quickly, burning a bright red, which suggested a meteor, but space junk is just as common, with around 200-400 known objects falling each year.However, officials from the National Service of Geology and Mining have since analyzed the charred sites strewn across the town of Dalcahue and found no evidence of a meteorite.“[G]eologists went to the site examining the area of the supposed impact. They worked on seven points corresponding to burnt thickets, where they found no remains, vestiges, or evidence of a meteorite falling,” the report stated.The geologists told TVN that they have collected soil samples for a more thorough analysis, and will release their conclusions in a few weeks.So, technically what we have here right now is an unidentified flying object. Yep, a UFO.Since it’s highly unlikely to be aliens, and a meteorite seems to have been ruled out, the most likely scenario is some kind of space junk falling to Earth. Largely we are unaware of the majority of space junk as it usually burns up in the atmosphere, falls in the ocean (which covers 70 percent of the planet), or lands somewhere remote and unpopulated.It’s very rare for space junk to actually hit the ground near people, and no one has ever been killed or seriously injured by falling debris. The only known occurrences of people being hit by space debris are five Japanese sailors on a ship that was hit by falling pieces of a Russian spacecraft in 1969, and a curious event in 1997 where a woman in the US got lightly brushed by material that turned out to be from a Delta 2 rocket booster.The most famous space debris events, of course, involve the space stations Mir and Skylab. America's first space station, Skylab, had a memorable return to Earth in 1979 when part of it crash-landed in Western Australia, who fined the US for littering. Mir, Russia's space station, fell to Earth in 2001. The largest object to ever reenter Earth's atmosphere, it fortunately landed in the Pacific Ocean, but not before we caught some spectacular scenes of it blazing across the sky.  
Protogalaxy formation in the three dark matter scenarios. P. Mocz et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. (2019)Dark matter is a curious thing. We have no direct proof of what it is but there is plenty of indirect evidence that a substance that only interacts with gravity and not light permeates the entire universe. It's also a lot more abundant, outweighing regular matter by five to one.Given that we don’t know its properties, however, there is plenty of room for speculation. Are dark matter particles heavy or light? Soon we might be able to detect one, but until then astrophysicists have to use another approach. Using computer simulations, they build galaxies and see how different they would look under the influence of dark matter with different properties. A new study has found that the very first galaxies would have looked very different depending on the nature of dark matter.Reporting in Physical Review Letters, an international group of researchers conducted simulations of how galaxies may have formed under three different scenarios. The first was the most widely accepted model known as cold dark matter, where particles of dark matter are heavy (10,000 times the mass of an electron) and slow. The second model was for warm dark matter, slightly lighter and slightly faster. For the third scenario they tested the fuzzy dark matter scenario, which consists of ultralight particles a billion billion billion times lighter than electrons. This was not easy, as this hypothetical dark matter would be so light that it would be governed by quantum mechanics, more like a collection of waves than individual particles, which is why it is described as “fuzzy.”These different scenarios have to create over time the galaxies that we know, but the way they get there are strikingly different.“Even though in the late universe these different dark matter scenarios may predict similar shapes for galaxies, the first galaxies would be strikingly different, which will give us a clue about what dark matter is,” lead author Dr Philip Mocz of Princeton University, explained in a statement.The team created three protogalaxies to test the scenarios out. In the cold dark matter scenario, galaxies formed in a bright near-spherical halo. The warm dark matter scenario showed that galaxies would have formed first in tail-like filaments. In the final scenario, the fuzzy dark matter also showed galaxies forming in filaments but these looked more like strings.We may not currently know what the environment around these protogalaxies was like, but upcoming telescopes might soon be able to solve this mystery. The team is building up more detailed simulations of these fictional galaxies so that once observations come in, they can be compared and contrasted against the simulations.
The Jovian south pole. NASA/JPL-Caltech/SwRI/MSSS Space is fraught with dangers and the engineers and scientists working on space missions need to anticipate them and be able to deal with many complex situations. NASA’s Juno recently had to conduct a propulsive maneuver to change its orbital velocity by 203 kilometers (126 miles) per hour.This was deemed necessary as the spacecraft was risking death by eclipse. Now, this is an unusual cause of death even for space standards. We have smashed probes into planets by accident and on purpose, and even just plain lost them, but the eclipse is peculiar. The issue is that Jupiter is huge and Juno is solar-powered. Not an ideal combo in certain circumstances.And on November 3, the craft was going to transit Jupiter’s shadow for 12 hours. That's long enough for Juno’s battery to be completely drained. With no power and in the cold of space, the craft was unlikely to survive. For this reason, between September 30 and October 1, NASA burned 73 kilograms (160 pounds) of fuel to carry out a 10.5-hour propulsive maneuver. This is five times longer than any previous use of the reaction-control thruster."With the success of this burn, we are on track to jump the shadow on Nov. 3," Scott Bolton, Juno principal investigator at the Southwest Research Institute in San Antonio, said in a statement. "Jumping over the shadow was an amazingly creative solution to what seemed like a fatal geometry. Eclipses are generally not friends of solar-powered spacecraft. Now instead of worrying about freezing to death, I am looking forward to the next science discovery that Jupiter has in store for Juno."Juno arrived at Jupiter in 2016. It performs a close flyby every 53 days with the next one happening on November 3. It will be its 23rd close flyby, taking it to an altitude of just 4,200 kilometers (2,600 miles) from the clouds of Jupiter. The mission has collected incredible data about the gas giant planet while also capturing breathtaking views. In June 2018, the mission was extended for another three years. "Pre-launch mission planning did not anticipate a lengthy eclipse that would plunge our solar-powered spacecraft into darkness," explained Ed Hirst, Juno project manager at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California. "That we could plan and execute the necessary maneuver while operating in Jupiter's orbit is a testament to the ingenuity and skill of our team, along with the extraordinary capability and versatility of our spacecraft."There are now 35 planned flybys, with the last one set to be on July 30, 2021. At that point, the craft will indeed be dead but in fire not in ice. The craft will be plunged into Jupiter to avoid any possible contamination of the Jovian system.
Map showing the gas filaments (blue) and the active star-forming galaxies (white dots), which are being fueled by the filaments. Hideki UmehataThe stuff in the universe is not randomly distributed but organized in a structure called the cosmic web. The most massive clusters of galaxies sit in the nodes, while the threads compose fewer galaxies but plenty of intergalactic gas. The distribution and interaction of gas filaments are a major driver of galaxy evolution – but studying them is not easy. Astronomers use the light of background sources to gain insight into these structures, and now researchers have reported in Science the emission of filaments around a proto-cluster 12 billion light-years from Earth.Proto-clusters are the progenitors of galaxy clusters, which sport hundreds if not thousands of galactic members. The target of the observations is SSA22, known for its impressive size, higher-than-average density, and incredible gas structures. More than 60 percent of all the hydrogen in the universe that formed during the Big Bang is predicted to be spread out across galaxies in the intergalactic medium. This hydrogen is believed to be fueling these young galaxies by providing the building blocks of new stars as well as feeding their supermassive black holes. The findings from this latest study appear to confirm that. By spotting the direct emission of these filaments, the team was able to extrapolate their 3D distribution and find they form as an intergalactic network of hydrogen, connecting galaxies to each other that extend for over 3 million light-years.The observations were possible because the gas in this proto-cluster is irradiated by the galaxies, making it detectable. The emission was captured by MUSE (Multi-Unit Spectroscopic Explorer) on the European Southern Observatory’s Very Large Telescope. The star-forming galaxies within these filaments were studied by the Atacama Large Millimeter/submillimeter Array.
Dima Zel/ShutterstockThere are a lot of space rocks out there and we know very little about them. Most of them remain completely unknown to us, others get discovered only when they get too close to our planet. This is the case of asteroid 2019 SP3 which is flying over our heads today, October 3.The celestial body is roughly the size of a building, between 15 and 33 meters (49 to 108 feet) in diameter. SP3's orbit is taking it slightly closer than the Moon is to Earth, roughly 370,000 kilometers (230,000 miles) from the planet surface, according to NASA’s data.While this is certainly a “close approach” in cosmic terms, there’s nothing to worry about. The rock will continue in its orbit around the Sun undisturbed. It moves with a speed of 8.53 kilometers (5.3 miles) per second and does a full orbit in 1,416 days, almost four years.While this object specifically poses no threat to us, it is a reminder of the potential risk we face from the heavens. The asteroid was only discovered on September 22. Other asteroids have discovered just hours before they flew by, and others have just hit us.To get an idea of what would happen if 2019 SP3 were to hit our planet we can look to the Chelyabinsk event that occurred in 2013 when a meteor roughly the same size exploded over the Russian town. The asteroid burned up in the atmosphere creating a bright flash of light and releasing enough energy that a sonic boom shattered windows for 518 square kilometers (200 square miles), with over 7,200 damaged buildings and a collapsed factory roof. Over 1,600 non-direct injuries occurred, mainly due to flying glass.There are roughly 20,000 known near-Earth Asteroids divided into four families depending on their orbital parameters. About 10 percent of these are considered Potentially Hazardous Asteroids, or PHAs. Space agencies such as NASA and ESA are keeping an eye on the all and observatories and amateurs worldwide often serendipitously spot new ones.The agencies also run "Asteroid Impact Simulation" exercises to plan and prepare for an asteroid impact. They win some, and lose some. The last one held earlier this year saw New York accidentally destroyed to save its projected target of Denver, highlighting the challenges we are likely to witness both before, during, and after the event if such a threat was discovered. 
Enceladus in its icy glory. NASA/JPL/Space Science InstituteSaturn’s moon Enceladus continues to look like a promising world for life outside of Earth. Thanks to investigations from the Cassini mission we have learned that in its subsurface ocean there is geothermal activity and organic compounds. In a new study, researchers have announced the discovery of some new kinds of organic compounds found.After last year's discovery of carbon-rich molecules, and the previous discovery of hydrocarbons, researchers have announced the discovery of small soluble organic molecules, such as amines, in plumes spurting out from the moon. These molecules are the building blocks of amino acids, in turn, the building blocks of proteins. "If the conditions are right, these molecules coming from the deep ocean of Enceladus could be on the same reaction pathway as we see here on Earth. We don't yet know if amino acids are needed for life beyond Earth, but finding the molecules that form amino acids is an important piece of the puzzle," lead author Nozair Khawaja, who led the research team of the Free University of Berlin, said in a statement. Their findings are published in the Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society.The new organics, observed by Cassini’s Cosmic Dust Analyzer (CDA), were found to be nitrogen- and oxygen-bearing compounds. Hydrothermal vents eject material from the core, which mix with water from Enceladus' subsurface ocean and get spat out as ice crystals. The compounds were likely to have deposited on the ice crystals within the surface fissures. The plumes then blast these ice grains into space and form Saturn’s E-ring. The ice crystals in the ring are a treasure trove of data for CDA, which is why two years after the mission ended, new discoveries are still being made about the Saturn system. "This work shows that Enceladus' ocean has reactive building blocks in abundance, and it's another green light in the investigation of the habitability of Enceladus," added co-author Frank Postberg.The complexity of the chemistry on Enceladus is obviously exciting as it's suggestive of the potential habitability of the frozen moon, but it is still extraordinary, even if it turns out that life didn’t develop there. 
Earthrise captured by the Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter in honor of the famous Apollo 8 photo. NASA Imagine you’re an alien civilization and you want to study our planet or “regard it with envious eyes”, where are the best places to position a probe? Well, physicist James Benford has an answer for you. There are regions around Earth where it’s possible for celestial bodies or artificial ones to co-orbit our planet. They are in a 1:1 resonance, so basically they remain at roughly the same distance from Earth as we go around the Sun.In a paper published in The Astronomical Journal, Benford discusses how these natural objects in resonance with our planet make them ideal places to hide a “lurker” as he referred to the possible probes. He lists the three main orbits these objects can take as well as the stability of some of the known co-orbitals.There is, for example, Cruithne, often referred to as Earth’s second moon (it isn’t), which is expected to leave its current orbit in about 5,000 years. And there is Kamoʻoalewa (or 2016 HO3) – the smallest, closest, and most stable quasi-satellite of Earth, which only came into its current orbit 100 years ago. There are more of these objects and many more are likely to be discovered in the future.Benford argues that these objects and their neighborhoods are ripe for SETI (Search for Extraterrestrial Intelligence) investigations. Using wavelengths from radio to optical to infrared, it could be possible to study these co-orbital bodies and find out if lurkers are on them. The physicist also suggests sending a robotic probe to rendezvous with these objects to study them up close.“What have we to lose by checking out these objects? Certainly resources such as time on telescopes, radio and optical. But we would be studying newly found objects, which could well be interesting astronomy. Nobody has really looked at these co-orbitals, other than orbital calculations and faint images. We know almost nothing about them,” Benford writes in the paper.The paper also detailed regions not ideal for lurkers, such as near the Earth, on the Moon, or further out around the asteroids. That said, Benford states a simple truth: We don't know anything about the intentions or logic of alien civilizations. We don’t even know if these alien civilizations are out there.
Ten billion years ago, Andromeda swallowed many small galaxies, whose stars can still be identified. Billions of years later, it consumed many more, which all came in a plane at 90 degrees to the original set. Geraint Lewis/University of Sydney A study of the small galaxies swallowed by our nearest large galactic neighbor has revealed something of how galaxies grow. In the process, it has hinted at something that, if true, would change the way we see the universe in profound ways.All galaxies, including our own Milky Way, grow by consuming smaller ones. Inevitably, the nearest large galaxy to our own, M31, also known as Andromeda, has eaten many small neighbors. Our first insight into the nature of these events is useful because Andromeda and the Milky Way are on course to meet. That's 4 billion years away, but it's good to be prepared.Dr Dougal Mackey of the Australian National University and Professor Geraint Lewis from the University of Sydney analyzed streams of stars within Andromeda's halo and identified some as the remnants of galaxies, even gaining approximations of when this occurred. Rather than a steady process, they identified two bursts separated by billions of years. The galaxies in the two rounds arrived at right angles to each other and maintained that motion even after being pulled apart.“We are cosmic archaeologists, except we are digging through the fossils of long-dead galaxies rather than human history,” Lewis said in a statement. Mackey told IFLScience the consumed galaxies contained globular clusters, groups of stars bound so closely together that only the most powerful gravitational disruptions pull them apart.Individual stars in Andromeda’s halo are usually too distant and faint for us to track their movements, but the clusters are a different matter, allowing the pair to identify in Nature the streams whose shared movements pin them as past galaxies.“Once you get below a certain mass, galaxies don’t contain globular clusters,” Mackey said, so the smallest are currently untraceable. However, he added that the contribution of these to Andromeda's growth was minor.One day, Andromeda will swallow the Milky Way as well. However, Mackey acknowledged to IFLScience this will be a very different process. The galaxies Andromeda has eaten up until now have masses a tenth of its total at most, usually much smaller. The Milky Way, on the other hand, is at least half Andromeda’s size.The merger of the two will destroy the spiral structure of each, creating an egg-like elliptical galaxy. By then, the Sun will have burned the Earth beyond recognition, but if humanity somehow survives elsewhere, consequences will be limited. Our view of the night sky will change utterly, but the space between the stars is so great that even when stars from Andromeda become mixed among our nearest neighbors, it is unlikely any will pass close enough to disrupt orbits within the inner solar system.One feature of the pair's work is still tentative but could turn out to be awe-inspiring. Around a decade ago astronomers noticed a curious pattern in the dwarf galaxies that surround Andromeda. Around half these galaxies orbit in a specific plane, something astronomers had not expected and struggled to explain. We now know this pattern is unstable, and can neither have been in place for a long time (astronomically speaking) or have lasted that far into the future.
SEIS on the surface of Mars. NASA/JPL-CaltechEarth is not the only place where quakes happen. They occur on the Moon and even the Red Planet. The first marsquake was detected last April and since then over 100 events have been recorded, with 21 strongly believed to be quakes (although the others might be too).Now, the team behind the detections has given us the chance to listen to the tremors on the Red Planet. The sonification is sped-up and slightly processed to be audible to the human ear and represents two marsquakes. The first had a magnitude of 3.7 and took place on the 173rd sol (Martian day) of the mission, which was May 22, 2019, on Earth. The second one had a magnitude of 3.3 and happened on sol 235, or July 25, 2019.The quakes were recorded by NASA’s Insight mission thanks to an extraordinary instrument called SEIS, aka the Seismic Experiment for Interior Structure. SEIS was developed by the French Space Agency, the Centre National d'Études Spatiales, and partners with the specific goal of studying the shakes of Mars. Equipped with information about marsquakes, planetary scientists can begin to study what the inside of the Red Planet is like."It's been exciting, especially in the beginning, hearing the first vibrations from the lander," said Constantinos Charalambous, an InSight science team member at Imperial College London. "You're imagining what's really happening on Mars as InSight sits on the open landscape."Marsquakes are different from their Earthly and lunar counterparts. On Earth, seismic waves move mostly unimpeded through the crust and last a few seconds. Whenever fractures happen on our planet, over time, water brings in new minerals to fill these cracks. On the Moon, the crust is fractured due to impacts and the waves are scattered with the quakes lasting for tens of minutes. The situation on Mars is somewhere in-between, with waves lasting for a minute or so.SEIS is remarkably sensitive and for this reason, researchers have a tough time distinguishing between quakes and other events. It can pick up movements of the nearby lander, the tenuous wind of Mars, and even the mechanical changes of the device itself. The team has started calling these the “dinks and donks”, which happen when parts of the device expand and contract as the temperature changes during the day.
Artist impression of the initial detection was made by the IceCube Neutrino Observatory (photographed) at the South Pole. IceCube/NSFAstronomy doesn't just use telescopes to observe space, it uses many types of cosmic “messenger” to help us understand what is happening out there. We have dishes catching radio waves, observatories for gravitational waves and, more recently, sophisticated experiments detecting neutrinos, the most elusive fundamental particle.Neutrinos have no electric charge and a tiny mass, which allows them to move through anything unimpeded. Over 600 trillions neutrinos pass through your body every second, most of them coming from the Sun. The ghostly particles are produced in many processes, and the most powerful of them can easily cross intergalactic distances before being detected.These high-energy neutrinos were detected for the first time last summer by the IceCube Neutrino Observatory in Antarctica, and now researchers have linked this special neutrino detection to its likely source: collisions between particle jets from a supermassive black hole in the radio galaxy TXS 0506+056. Their findings are published in Astronomy & Astrophysics.The radio galaxy in question is full of energetic processes, like an active supermassive black hole emitting jets, but it is not a unique galaxy, we know many other objects just like it. The researchers reasoned that the production of such an energetic neutrino must have a more peculiar cause.  “It was a bit of a mystery why only TXS 0506+056 has been identified as a neutrino emitter,” lead author Silke Britzen from the Max Planck Institute for Radio Astronomy, said in a statement. “We wanted to unravel what makes TXS 0506+056 special, to understand the neutrino creation process and to localize the emission site, so [we] studied a series of high-resolution radio images of the jet.”The images revealed complex interactions between the material released by the jet. One explanation has the material from an older jet being hit by a newer jet. Or maybe it is two jets from the same source that are interacting. Either scenario strongly suggests that the energetic processes from the jets are the cause of the neutrino emission.Supermassive black hole jets are seen in many galaxies and they often extend up to a million light-years from the emitting black hole. In the case of TXS 0506+056, which is located 3.8 billion light-years away, the complexity might be due to having a binary supermassive black hole system. These systems can happen during a galaxy collision, and some of the observations from this study suggest that this may be the case for this object.While this “multi-messenger” type of astronomy is still in its infancy, this and other discoveries of the last few years show its potential to dramatically expand our understanding of the universe.
The 30 bubbles and four bowshocks in the new Spitzer image. NASA/JPL-CaltechThe formation of stars happens in large clouds of dust and gas, spread about in clumps and filaments inside galaxies. As young hot massive stars begin to shine, their powerful stellar winds sculpt these clouds, creating bubbles.NASA’s Spitzer Space Telescope, the agency's flagship infrared telescope, has observed such a star-forming region in the constellation Aquila (the Eagle). Within the nebula, astronomers and citizen scientists have been able to identify 30 bubbles each between 10 and 30 light-years across.It is difficult to estimate their true sizes because it is difficult to work out exactly how far away the cloud is, so astronomers used better-known bubbles to work out the properties of these new ones. Each bubble houses hundreds, if not thousands of stars, and infrared light is key to working that out.Visible light is often blocked by the dust in stellar clouds, but infrared shines through. The different false colors of the images represent different infrared wavelengths, from which researchers can spot different features. Of course, the bubbles (in circles in the image below) are quite prominent, but the image also shows bow shocks (in squares). These arcs of warm dust are created when the stellar winds from a fast star slam into the surrounding material.The image doesn’t just show these features either, it also shows background stars in blue, and the vast expanse of dust and organic molecules shining in green.The beautiful image of the nebula is only a tiny demonstrable fraction of Spitzer's long career and only a small number of the infrared bubbles known to humanity. The Milky Way Project was set up by the Zooniverse collaboration to identify these bubbles. In the latest data release, citizen scientists identified 2,600 bubbles and 599 bow shocks, described in detail in a paper published in the Monthly Astronomical society.
Artist's impression of ESA's Rosalind Franklin Mars rover, one of the many missions due to launch next summer in the search for life on Mars. ESA/ATG medialabIs there life on Mars? A question everyone from Carl Sagan to HG Wells to Bowie has sought the answer to – and we may finally be close to getting an answer, but the world is not ready for it, according to NASA’s chief scientist.Next year, two planned missions to send rovers to Mars will drill deep into the surface in the search for extraterrestrial life, which means we could find out the answer in the next couple of years. If we are successful it will be “revolutionary,” but we’re not prepared for this momentous occasion, Dr Jim Green, director of NASA's Planetary Science Division, warned.“I’ve been worried about that because I think we’re close to finding it and making some announcements,” Dr Green said in an interview with The Sunday Telegraph. “It will start a whole new line of thinking. I don’t think we’re prepared for the results.”In 2020, Earth and Mars will be at a close approach, opening a prime window for mission launches, something that five space agencies are taking advantage of. China and the United Arabic Emirates are preparing for their first trips, launching an orbiter and rover, and an orbiter, respectively.NASA and the European Space Agency (ESA) in partnership with Russia’s Roscosmos are both sending rovers to drill for samples, hoping to find organic matter. NASA’s Mars 2020 rover will drill into rock formations to collect samples and send them back to Earth – the first time material from Mars will visit our planet. ESA’s Rosalind Franklin rover will also drill for samples, crushing up and analyzing them in Roscosmos' stationary surface laboratory while there.Dr Green thinks both could be successful, and if they are it would be akin to Copernicus stating in the 1500s that Earth goes around the Sun, not the other way around, and how after that we had to reconsider everything we knew. Which is why he thinks Earth is not prepared for what happens if we do.“What happens next is a whole new set of scientific questions. Is that life like us? How are we related? Can life move from planet to planet or do we have a spark and just the right environment and that spark generates life – like us or not like us – based on the chemical environment that it is in?” he said.NASA’s Mars 2020 rover is due to land on the Red Planet's surface on February 18, 2021, with ESA’s Rosalind Franklin rover arriving one month later in March 2021. Both are searching in the vicinity of an ancient lake or ocean bed that once held water – so crucial for life – and may now be rich in clay. NASA's chosen landing site is the Jezero Crater delta, a 49-kilometer-wide (30-mile) crater once thought to have been flooded with water, and now a clay-rich delta. The ExoMars mission hasn't finalized its landing site yet but it announced last year its preferred site is Oxia Planum, a site rich in iron-magnesium clay, a sign water was once present.Mars is not the only place with the potential to have once held water, including places scientists hadn't thought possible before. It was recently revealed that Venus, Earth's hellish twin, may have once had water 3 billion years ago before its atmosphere became incredibly dense and hot 700 million years ago. “There is no reason to think that there isn’t civilisations elsewhere, because we are finding exoplanets all over the place," Dr Green said. “This concept of what a ‘Goldilocks Zone’ looks like has to be modified.” 
GJ 3512b was discovered by the 3.5-meter telescope at Calar Alto Observatory. The star it circles is so small the planet would make this snowy environment look very warm. Pedro Amado/Marco Azzaro - IAA/CSICIt seems whenever scientists start to think their models of planetary formation are falling into place, something comes along to challenge them. The latest example is a star with barely enough mass to be a star, orbited by a planet with a mass half that of Jupiter.Astronomers have noticed that most of the planets we have found around low-mass stars are closer to the Earth or Neptune in size than to Jupiter. This is consistent with theories about the way planets form – fairly simply a gas cloud that only has enough material to create a low-mass star isn't likely to have enough in its outer disk to form large planets.So the discovery of GJ 3512b was a surprise, and one that attracted so much attention the paper announcing the discovery in Science has 183 authors. Even by the standards of low-mass stars, GJ 3512 is small, one-eighth the Sun's mass. Yet GJ 3512b is a minimum of 0.46 Jupiters, and may be more massive still.GJ 3512b's orbit lasts 204 days. Considering how faint GJ 3512 is (0.00157 times the brightness of the Sun), less light falls on the planet than Jupiter, but the orbit is very stretched out, creating brief periods of relative warmth. There are signs of a second, much more distant planet, but the signal isn't clear enough to be confident it exists, let alone deduce much about it. Such a planet would, however, explain the long, thin orbit, considered a much more likely outcome where two planets interact than where one orbits solo.M-type stars, those with mass less than 60 percent of that of the Sun are the most common category in the galaxy, but only 10 percent of the planets we have so-far discovered orbit these sorts of stars. That's partly because we've spent more time looking at stars similar to the Sun, which after all we know are capable of supporting life, than M-types, also known as red dwarfs.However, it is also because larger planets are easier to spot, and red dwarfs usually don't have anything all that big. Intriguingly, where we have found gas giants orbiting M-type stars they've usually been at large distances, something that also doesn't suit the most commonly used techniques for planet spotting.The characteristics of the system led the authors to consider an alternative disk instability model for planet formation. This might convert a larger portion of the mass of the proto-planetary material into actual planets, explaining the outcome we see here.
What a beauty. Christina Koch/NASAIn an image that looks more fantastical than real, NASA astronaut Christina Koch snapped a photograph of the Russian Soyuz spacecraft with her best friend on board as it hurtled towards the International Space Station after blasting off from the Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan."What it looks like from @Space_Station when your best friend achieves her lifelong dream to go to space. Caught the second stage in progress! We can’t wait to welcome you onboard, crew of Soyuz 61!" she tweeted.The friend she speaks of is flight engineer Jessica Meir, who arrived with her colleagues – Oleg Skripochka and Hazzaa Ali Almansoori – on the orbital outpost six hours after launch. This is Meir’s first launch into space, where she will live aboard the space station until spring 2020, helping her crewmates with around 250 research experiments, according to NASA. Christina Koch is currently aboard the space station as part of Expedition 59, 60, and now 61. She is expected to set the women's record for longest single spaceflight with 328 days in space. The luminous sphere and squiggle above the curve of Earth's horizon is the exhaust from the initial rocket. The launch is Expedition 61, where crew members will perform a series of spacewalks to install new lithium-ion batteries for solar array power channels on the ISS. They will also repair the Alpha Magnetic Spectrometer that helps researchers study dark matter and, you know, just the origins of the universe.
This illustration shows the radio signal from the fast radio burst FRB 181112 passing through the halo of a foreground galaxy on its way toward the telescopes that detected it on Earth. J. Josephides/Centre for Astrophysics and Supercomputing, Swinburne University of TechnologyGalaxies in the modern universe are surrounded by huge halos of gas and dark matter that can extend hundreds of thousands of light-years across. The properties of such halos are difficult to measure since the gas is extremely diffuse, but now astronomers have received help from an unexpected event, a fast radio burst (FRB).FRBs are incredible releases of energy that only last a fraction of a second and are detected in radio waves. The origin of most of these events is a complete mystery and we have struggled to detect them quickly enough to localize them in the sky. Lately, researchers have been able to pinpoint their origin with more precision.As reported in the journal Science, FRB 181112’s position is known with high precision and its powerful radio waves passed through the halo of a foreground galaxy before reaching Earth in November 2018. These two characteristics gave researchers a chance to find out more about halos. The gas surrounding this galaxy is a lot less turbulent and has a lot less magnetism than previous observations suggested.“The signal from the fast radio burst exposed the nature of the magnetic field around the galaxy and the structure of the halo gas. The study proves a new and transformative technique for exploring the nature of galaxy halos,” Professor J. Xavier Prochaska, from UC Santa Cruz, said in a statement. “This galaxy’s halo is surprisingly tranquil. The radio signal was largely unperturbed by the galaxy, which is in stark contrast to what previous models predict would have happened to the burst.”FRB 181112 consisted of several pulses, each lasting less than 40 microseconds. A pulse's length depends on the density of the material it crosses, so the halo of the galaxy must be very diffuse, fewer than 100 atoms in a cubic meter.“Like the shimmering air on a hot summer’s day, the tenuous atmosphere in this massive galaxy should warp the signal of the fast radio burst," explained co-author Jean-Pierre Macquart, an astronomer at the International Center for Radio Astronomy Research at Curtin University, Australia. "Instead we received a pulse so pristine and sharp that there is no signature of this gas at all.” While the research is exciting, it is about one single galaxy. The team is unsure if this object is typical or peculiar. They plan to use more FRBs to study tens if not hundreds of these object to better understand the evolution of gas halos.
Viewing the accretion disk of a black hole side-on shows how the immense gravitational field warps our view of the light by altering its path to make it look like a hump rather than flat. NASA’s Goddard Space Flight Center/Jeremy SchnittmanIn April of this year, astronomers revealed one of humanity’s greatest achievements in science – the first-ever image of a black hole. (Of course, the photo wasn’t directly of the black hole itself, that would be impossible. More on that later.)Stunning as that was, to the casual observer who may not have known what to expect, it was a bit… blurry. It took an incredible amount of time, data, and skill by an extremely dedicated team to take that blurry photo and one day we will have real “razor-sharp” color video footage of one, they’ve since promised. But until then, NASA has released a stunning simulation of what that black hole would look like in all its crystal clear glory.Before that first image, the only way to look at a black hole was indirectly, observing its effects rather than the object itself. By their very natures, black holes swallow light, making them rather difficult to look in the eye.Black holes are objects that generate a field of gravity so strong that nothing in its vicinity – including light – can escape.Right on the edge of that precipice is the event horizon, the threshold where to escape the pull of the black hole you’d need to move faster than the speed of light – and according to Einstein’s theory of special relativity, nothing in space can move faster than the speed of light. It’s the shadow of the event horizon of the black hole at the center of galaxy Messier 87 that astronomers managed to photograph.The orange donut in the image is the black hole’s accretion disk – a flat spinning disk of gas, dust, and stellar debris that orbits the black hole, not quite falling in. We can see this disk because the immense force of the black hole’s gravity accelerates the spinning particles and they smash into each other, releasing X-rays and gamma rays in visible light, which allow us to observe – and now take photos.The incredible visualization, released by NASA’s Goddard Space Flight Center for its Black Hole Week, shows how that extreme gravity warps our view of the light by altering its path as it's emitted from different regions of the disk, giving it a misshapen look.  The part of the disk closest to the black hole spins at close to the speed of light, while the outer part spins more slowly. As magnetic fields wind through this churning disk, bright blobs form and disappear. The different speeds of the inner and outer disk stretch these blobs, creating what look like lanes in the disk.Importantly, this new simulation shows the disk from the side instead of face-on. At this angle, the light that is technically coming from behind the black hole is warped to look like an arc or hump over the black center. Also, if you look closely, the left side shines brighter than the right side. The simulation shows the gas that flows towards us is brighter because of a phenomenon called relativistic, or Doppler, beaming – much like a lighthouse light is brightest as it points directly at us in its arc, getting dimmer as it moves away from us.Simulations like this help us understand what we can't see but know is occurring around black holes, and they help us to get to grips with what we're actually looking at in the one incredible image we do have.  
Pasi Taavitsainen / Wikimedia CommonsA man who got punched in the head for a living says he believes the Earth is flat and NASA is faking images of the Earth from space.Ex-super-middleweight champion boxer Carl Froch, who was punched on a regular professional basis between 2002 and 2014, said in an interview that he believes NASA and Elon Musk are hiding the truth from the rest of us humans for reasons he failed to elaborate on."The Earth is flat, 100 percent. There's no proof of the curvature and this fake space agency NASA use CGI images and everyone is different," the 42-year-old told the Daily Star. "I'm looking at them thinking: 'Hang on a minute, they're like cartoons.'"The boxer-turned-commentator seems to suggest that the only proof he will accept is flying to space himself and having a look back at our round planet from above."When someone like Richard Branson goes up there and starts doing chartered flights and you can look back on Earth and see the Earth's curvature, I'll believe the earth is a globe."He's not the only British sports star of recent years to have doubts about whether the Earth is round, despite there being many ways for you to prove to yourself that it is in fact round. Former England cricketer Freddie Flintoff said that he was coming around to the idea the Earth was flat and had questions such as: "If you’re in a helicopter and you hover why does the Earth not come to you if it’s round?""When the helicopter starts out, it's sitting on the ground and the ground (being part of the Earth) is rotating at one revolution per day, as we know," Kelly Chipps, a postdoctoral fellow in the department of physics at the Colorado School of Mines explained at the time, in case you were wondering."Since the helicopter is also sitting on the ground, it's also inside this moving reference frame, and has the momentum that goes with it so the helicopter is also moving at one revolution per day. In fact, so is the air!" she added."Now, when the helicopter takes off, it flies straight up to some height above the Earth's surface. But though the helicopter has exerted a force (through the use of its rotors) to lift it straight up, it hasn't exerted a force in the horizontal direction to counter the motion (momentum) it already had that one revolution per minute! So though the helicopter is no longer touching the ground, unless the pilot purposely exerts a force against the helicopter's initial momentum, the helicopter will continue to move at one revolution per day, and thus remain above the same spot on the Earth's surface from where it took off."If you'd like a quick visual explainer, check out these people trampolining on a moving truck. 
2I/Borisov in all its glory. Gemini Observatory/NSF/AURAThe International Astronomical Union has confirmed that the comet spotted a few weeks ago by amateur astronomer Gennady Borisov from MARGO Observatory, Crimea, is indeed coming from interstellar space. This is only the second known interstellar object to pass through our Solar System (the first was ‘Oumuamua).Since it was first observed on August 30, astronomers have been tracking the comet's orbit in detail. It is now clear that the comet is a visitor from another star. The Union has also officially given it a name: 2I/Borisov. 2I stands for second interstellar object and, given that it is clearly a comet, they kept the tradition of naming it after the discoverer.2I/Borisov was discovered when it was over 400 million kilometers (250 million miles) from the Sun – and it is only getting closer. It will reach its aphelion on December 8, when it will be roughly 300 million kilometers (190 million miles) away. That’s about twice the Earth-Sun distance. It is moving with a speed of about 150,000 kilometers (93,000 miles) per hour and coming toward the inner Solar System at a 40-degree angle with respect to the orbital plane of the Earth. Its orbit, orientation, and the fact that the comet is much faster than any known Solar System object at that distance were the initial clues that led researchers to suspect the comet was interstellar.The Gran Telescopio Canarias has obtained the light spectrum of the object, from which they were able to establish its composition. It turns out that it isn’t much different from comets that formed in the Oort Cloud, the region far beyond the orbit of Pluto. Formations of comets in other star systems are likely to be similar to our own.Astronomers have not yet been able to measure its size precisely but current estimates from NASA put the comet's nucleus at between 2 and 16 kilometers (1.2 and 10 miles) across. While this is only the second known interstellar object to pass by, it likely won’t be the last. Estimates suggest that at any given point there is at least one within the orbit of Mars. Unfortunately, most of them are too small and faint to be discovered.
Tracks of Yutu-2 near the mysterious material. CNSA/CLEPThe Chang’e-4 mission has been exploring the far side of the Moon since its historic landing back in January, providing us with some intriguing and never-before-seen observations of the lunar surface. Its rover, Yutu-2 (or Jade Rabbit), has also been pretty busy and over the summer it found something truly extraordinary: a gel-like substance with a different coloration from the surrounding soil.The discovery happened on July 28, but it was only announced at the end of last month. No explanations have been officially given for the substance but researchers have shared new photos and insights of the area over on the rover's driving diary as well as in an official post from the Chinese National Space Agency itself, marking the rover and lander entering their 10th month of operations.Unfortunately, there is little to glean from the pictures, but even collecting enough scientific data was a challenge for Yutu-2. The crater the substance had been spotted in was deemed too deep for the rover to get out of again. To use its Visible and Near-Infrared Spectrometer (VNIS), it had to drive right up to the edge."According to the coordinates given by the scientists, if the field of view of the infrared spectrometer is to cover the material, the front wheel of the rabbit must be suspended into the pit," researchers said. Luckily, with some skilled driving, they managed to negotiate the rover into a suitable position and it scanned the crater using the VNIS. This light reflected off the material and was used to work out its chemical composition.The team then studied the data during Yutu-2's scheduled and very necessary midday "nap". Given the absence of atmosphere, things can get hot on the surface of the Moon (about 100°C/212°F) so the rover and lander shut down to avoid serious damage from overheating.Researchers were disappointed to find out that the initial scans of the area from the lunar morning were affected by the many shadows in the crater, so they continued to study the unknown substance into the lunar afternoon, several more days. According to Space.com a "satisfactory detection" was made but the results have not been released yet. It was then put back into hibernation to sleep for the 14-day lunar night.The two robotic inhabitants of the far side of the Moon woke up yesterday on schedule as the 10th lunar day of their mission dawns (a lunar day is roughly a month).Researchers also used this project to analyze the bottom of the crater where the “gel” was discovered, as well as the spatter pattern from the meteorite that formed the crater. Some experts have speculated that the substance might have been formed in the impact and might be related to impact glass formed during a collision with a space rock. 
Artist’s representation of Venus with water. NASAToday, Venus is a planet reminiscent of Dante Alighieri’s seventh ring of Hell. The second planet from the Sun, Venus is a little smaller than Earth and covered with mountains and large lava plains that see scorching temperatures and a weighty atmosphere mainly made of carbon dioxide with thick clouds of sulfuric acid. But new research suggests that Earth’s “twisted sister” planet may have once been characterized by temperate conditions and liquid water capable of supporting life.That is, until a dramatic transformation more than 700 million years ago restructured the planet’s atmosphere.“Our hypothesis is that Venus may have had a stable climate for billions of years. It is possible that the near-global resurfacing event is responsible for its transformation from an Earth-like climate to the hellish hot-house we see today,” said Michael Way, from The Goddard Institute for Space Studies, in a statement.The new study presented last week at the EPSC-DPS Joint Meeting builds on previous research from NASA’s Pioneer Venus that suggested the planet once had shallow oceans of water. This time around, scientists ran five simulations that assumed different levels of water coverage across the planet in order to see if a stable climate would have been able to support it. Three of the five scenarios assumed Venus had a topography similar to what we see today but with an ocean averaging 310 meters (1,017 feet), a shallow layer of water averaging 10 meters (33 feet), and a small amount of water that was locked in soil. They then compared those against a scenario accounting for a planet with Earth’s topography and a world with oceans reaching 158 meters (518 feet) deep.Researchers then simulated environmental conditions at 4.2 billion years ago, 715 million years ago, and today by adapting a 3D general circulation model to account for an increase in solar radiation seen in our Sun over time and changing atmospheric compositions over Venus.According to the simulations, Venus would have been able to maintain stable temperatures between 20 and 50°C (68 and 122°F) for about 3 billion years. Around 4 billion years ago, Venus would have rapidly cooled after its formation, resulting in a carbon dioxide-dominated atmosphere. Over the next 3 billion years, the planet may have evolved like Earth and locked CO2 into silicate rocks in the planet’s surface. Sometime around 715 million years ago, researchers believe the atmosphere may have been dominated by nitrogen with trace amounts of CO2 and methane much as Earth is today.“Venus currently has almost twice the solar radiation that we have at Earth. However, in all the scenarios we have modeled, we have found that Venus could still support surface temperatures amenable for liquid water,” said Way.These conditions may have been maintained up until today if a mysterious cataclysmic event hadn’t occurred. Between 700 and 750 million years ago, a series of events released – or “outgassed” – carbon dioxide stored in the planet’s rocks. Though the exact cause is unknown, scientists believe that it was likely linked to volcanic activity such as what occurs when magma bubbles and releases CO2 from molten rocks into the atmosphere. If these rocks solidified before reaching the surface, a barrier would have been created that prevented the gas from being reabsorbed into the rocks, leading to a greenhouse effect.“On Earth, we have some examples of large-scale outgassing, for instance the creation of the Siberian Traps 500 million years ago which is linked to mass extinction, but nothing on this scale. It completely transformed Venus,” said Way.How this process occurred depends on a deeper understanding of how quickly Venus had initially cooled following its formation and whether it was able to condense liquid water on its surface in the first place. It’s unknown whether the outgassing event occurred in one event or over the course of several. In all, researchers say a deeper understanding of the rocky planet is needed in order to answer these questions.
The supermassive black hole at the center of M87. EHT CollaborationIn April 2017, radio telescopes across the world were used together at the same time to perform an incredible feat: observing two supermassive black holes. This was the Event Horizon Telescope and the first results, published back in April, gave us the very first picture of one of these amazing objects.The National Science Foundation has given the collaboration a $12.7 million grant to plan the next generation Event Horizon Telescope (ngEHT). The money will be used to enhance the existing design. Currently, the telescope is made by connecting existing facilities from around the world. This technique, which is known as interferometry, allows astronomers to have a radio telescope that is effectively the size of the Earth.The grant will be used to study how to perfect this telescope. The team will consider locations around the world where seven or eight additional telescopes can be placed to fill out the virtual dish of the EHT. This should allow faster imaging speeds, which will lead to the first movie of the extreme gravity environment around a black hole.“This really is, as we like to say, the end of the beginning or the beginning of the middle, and the best is really yet to come. We want to increase the capability of the EHT to go from still images to making movies. Imagine being able to see a black hole evolve in real-time,” Dr Shep Doeleman, founding director of the EHT, told IFLScience when the collaboration won the Breakthrough Awards earlier this month.New telescopes and technology will allow scientists to study the black holes in more frequencies, greatly improve our understanding. Each observatory will have to be equipped with ways to record and transfer an incredible amount of data."Currently, the EHT records about 10 PetaBytes of data each session," team member Dr Vincent Fish said in a statement. "With planned higher data rates and the inclusion of new observatories, EHT data volumes could exceed 100 PetaBytes. Part of this project will be to investigate how to leverage advances in commercial technology to cost-effectively record and transport such a large volume of data."But it’s not just hardware. It’s also software. The telescopes need to be linked in a way that all the signals are aligned to a fraction of a trillionth of a second. Meanwhile, the immense amount of data needs to be processed and analyzed, which poses a challenge. But the team is rising to it."Our own Milky Way is host to a supermassive black hole that evolves dramatically over the course of a night," Caltech's Dr Katie Bouman added. "We are developing new methods, which incorporate emerging ideas from machine learning and computational imaging, in order to make the very first movies of gas spiraling towards an event horizon."  The team observed the supermassive black hole in the Milky Way two years ago, but its mercurial character has made the analysis quite difficult. Doeleman confirms that they are working hard on it, so we might soon see an equally breathtaking image. As he said, the best is truly yet to come. 
NASAA lot of the last few years has played out like the beginnings of a terrifying sci-fi movie. Unnerving robots started deciding whether people should get the jobs they want. Self-driving cars turned out to be more likely to run you over if you aren't quite white enough for their programming, and soap dispensers were also discovered to be racist.Then there was the time a mysterious hole was discovered in the International Space Station (ISS), which appeared to have been drilled from the inside. In August 2018, NASA announced they had found a "slow leak" on the ISS, after noticing a drop in pressure. Unlike a sci-fi movie and more like a Bugs Bunny cartoon, the hole was initially plugged through the high-tech solution of an astronaut jamming his finger in there whilst the other astronauts figured out what to do next. They then covered it with tape, which is only marginally more reassuring than a finger, before using “epoxy on a gauze wipe to plug the hole".The tiny hole, which was in the Soyuz MS-09 Roscosmos spacecraft docked to the ISS, was investigated from both inside and out, with the working theory being that it was caused by a micrometeoroid. However, it was later concluded, according to Russian cosmonaut Sergei Prokopyev, that the hole was drilled from the inside, whether by mistake or on purpose.The module was returned to Earth in December 2018. The head of Rosmocos has now said that they know exactly what the cause of the hole was – but they are not releasing that information to anybody."It was in the household compartment [of the Soyuz MS-09 ship], it had already burned down long ago when the ship was approaching. We took all the samples. What happened is clear to us, but we won’t tell you anything," Dmitry Rogozin said at the conference, according to Russian news agency RIA Novosti."We do need to retain some sort of secrecy."NASA say they have not been told the conclusions of the Rosmocos investigation into the hole and will be talking to the space agency about the issue in the coming days, though they say they don't want the issue to upset the healthy working relationship the two agencies have developed over 40 years of cooperation in space."They have not told me anything," NASA Administrator Jim Bridenstine told the Houston Chronicle. "I don't want to let one item set [the relationship] back, but it is clearly not acceptable that there are holes in the International Space Station." 
8sek/YouTubeThe Area 51 storm was always going to go one of two ways, according to the Internet memes.Option one:We were going to show up and a wave of Kyles, aided by furries and Karens, would distract the fire of the armed guards while the rest of us snuck around the back, at which point we would liberate the aliens from their captors and "clap alien cheeks". Nobody would get injured because we had Naruto run at the guards (thus dodging all their bullets). Option two:We would actually show up and it would play out realistically. The wave of Kyles and Karens would be mown down by army fire as they attempted to Naruto run into an actual military air base.So, in many ways, it's probably best that it played out as secret option number three: Everyone realized it was a joke and basically behaved themselves, bar one or two minor incidents. People arrived with the expressed intention to "clap them cheeks".And practiced their Naruto run. A lot.But when it came down to actually raiding Area 51, that didn't actually materialize.That isn't to say that the police didn't have to get involved."On September 20 at approximately 3am, Nye County Sheriff's Office responded to the alien travel center on highway 373," the Sheriff's Office said in a video statement."Crowds of approximately 40 people surrounded the parking lot of the travel center and made threats to storm the gates of Area 51. The crowd was compliant for commands from deputies and eventually dispersed. Some participants then assembled at the north and south gates, but heeded warnings upon confrontation with law enforcement and retreated. Several participants moved back and forth between the two gates and crowds continued to gather."If they were going to Naruto run at all, now was their chance."At approximately 05:00, all participants had retreated and dispersed. Everyone was compliant and peaceful. All Nye County resources were returned to their assigned posts."The closest they came to any actual confrontation was one incident that resulted in a woman being detained for trying to trespass into Area 51, whilst a man was arrested for public urination just outside Area 51.Part of the "raid" was captured on YouTube.
YouTube / Elisa JensenIn this divided world, only one thing can unite us. No, it's not the urgent need to fight climate change. No, it's not a need for nuclear disarmament, stop being so preachy. It's breaking into Area 51 in order to clap some alien ass.The world has, for some reason, really come together behind the idea of storming Area 51. (If you don't know what's going on, check out this explainer and come back).We even came up with and agreed on a plan: Whilst the Kyles go absolutely beserk on Monster Energy drink and the furries advance slowly towards the armed guards backed up by Karens, we slip in behind the base safely. At this point, we either "clap that alien ass" or break them out of there and clap it later at a more convenient time for everyone involved, that part at least we have not yet clarified. It's nice to leave some surprises for the day, I guess.Well, the big day has finally arrived, and people have actually shown up to the two small towns just outside of Area 51 ready to storm it. So far so good. But clearly, nobody is going to actually attempt to break into an actual military base... right?ArrestsAs well as the two YouTubers (of course) who were arrested last week, it appears that one woman has been detained so far, after attempting to cross the gate at around 3 am local time. A second report says that another male was arrested at the same time, urinating nearby, whilst the woman tried to duck under the gate. So far, no details have been released on whether she attempted a Naruto run, which according to our best scientists (fine, Internet memes) would have allowed her to dodge bullets as well as arrest.Naruto runner(s?)One man (or hero, whichever term you prefer) showed up behind a journalist from KTNV ActionK News covering the event earlier today and was seen Naruto running towards the military base, or at least the line of toilets set up for visitors. But, it's still early.The locals are annoyedThe town of Rachel, the closest to Area 51, is not used to seeing so many visitors and is pleased that not many people have turned up, yet."So far we see a couple of hundred people in Rachel for the botched Alienstock event," says a statement on the town's website (we're not going to link to it, their town has a population of 54 people and so its site is likely not set up for large volumes of traffic)."Law enforcement clearly outnumbers visitors."They report that there are a few campervans set up around the area and a makeshift stage, though nothing too difficult to deal with as yet."This has very clearly become Fyre Fest 2.0 after the creator of the Storm Area 51 movement pulled out and the organizers started suing each other. We understand that the Area 51 Basecamp event in Hiko, on the other hand, is quite successful and people are having a great time."Here's where it gets a bit threatening."If you still choose to visit this weekend, stay away from the residential part of Rachel. Local landowners will step up to protect their property. The nearby military installation will be guarded by Air Force security and by various local and federal law enforcement agencies. In order to keep curious visitors out of trouble law enforcement will block all access roads leading to the perimeter of the military base. Anyone trespassing in the restricted zone around Area 51 will be arrested."Do not go near the border, and absolutely do not cross the line. Along all major dirt roads, the border is marked with clear warning signs. In other areas, orange posts mark the border. There is no fence."Polite warning from policeThere appears to be a fairly heavy police presence so far, with cops posing for selfies and posting them online as a polite reminder that they're there.Alien shenanigans The festival looks pretty fun. People have been dancing through the night and practicing their Naruto runs.So far, it looks like everyone is just having a good time, and nothing has been attempted that will get any people (furries, rock-throwers or Karens) killed by the military. Phew.There are several live streams around, though they drop in and out with limited signal. At the time of writing, these below are working, though we will update if that changes.
Jurik Peter/ShutterstockObjects like pulsar J0952-0607 are far from common. Not only are pulsars neutron stars that pack more mass than our Sun in a sphere just 20 kilometers (12 miles) across, but they also spin on their axis at incredible speeds. This is what makes J0952-0607 truly special to astronomers: It completes 707 rotations every second, making it the second-fastest pulsar ever discovered.As these pulsars spin, they emit radiation. From the perspective of Earth, they pulsate every time they turn in our direction, making their detection similar to the flashes from a lighthouse. In the case of J0952-0607, this happens once every 1.4 milliseconds. The pulsations are seen in radio waves, gamma-rays, or both depending on the geometry of the system. Previously, pulsar J0952-0607 had only been detected with radio observatories, but now an international team has caught this rapid pulsation in gamma rays.As reported in The Astrophysical Journal, the team had the painstaking task of going through the data from NASA’s Fermi Large Area Telescope (LAT). The gamma-ray emissions were extremely faint over 8.5 years of observations (equivalent to about 220 billion pulses) and they detected only 200 gamma-rays. Thanks to this work, the team realized that there was an error in the original coordinates for the object and they were looking slightly off the real position of the star.“Our discovery of the gamma-ray pulsations revealed this error,” lead author Lars Nieder, from Albert Einstein Institute, said in a statement. “This mistake was corrected in the publication reporting the radio pulsar discovery. A new and extended gamma-ray search made a rather faint – but statistically significant – gamma-ray pulsar discovery at the corrected position.”Once the position had been corrected, the team was able to reanalyze the 8.5 years' worth of data. They were surprised to find that the pulsar didn't seem to emit gamma radiation before 2011. The reason for this is currently without an answer. The system has been observed not just in gamma-rays and radio waves but also in visible light.J0952-0607 has a small companion star, one-fifteenth the mass of the Sun, which is tidally locked so that one side gets heated while the other side remains colder than the other. The optical observations also highlight another mystery. Based on the radio observations, the researchers estimated that the system is 4,400 light-years away. The optical detection instead puts the two stars at almost three times as far. The scientists hope that more gamma-ray data will solve this discrepancy.“We will keep studying this system with gamma-ray, radio, and optical observatories since there are still unanswered questions about it. This discovery also shows once more that extreme pulsar systems are hiding in the Fermi-LAT catalogue,” added Professor Bruce Allen, Nieder’s PhD supervisor.
First footprint on the Moon, 1969. NASA/Digitial Image Studio/ShutterstockJust a few days after a NASA official apparently confirmed the deadline of landing people on the Moon by the “second half of 2024”, another NASA spokesperson has suggested the “aggressive goal” of the current administration is highly unlikely to be met.In fact, according to AP News, the top NASA official's words were: “I wouldn’t bet my oldest child’s upcoming birthday present or anything like that.”The White House-imposed 2024 deadline came back in March, issued by Vice President Mike Pence at the fifth meeting of the National Space Council. Before that, NASA had a working deadline of 2028, but "that's just not good enough," Pence had said. “We’re better than that.”Nobody has set foot on the Moon since the final Apollo mission, Apollo 17, in 1972."The United States must remain first in space in this century as in the last, not just to propel our economy and secure our nation but, above all, because the rules and values of space, like every great frontier, will be written by those who have the courage to get there first and the commitment to stay," said Pence.Though an admirable goal, Kenneth Bowersox, acting associate administrator for human exploration and operations at NASA, told a Congressional subcommittee this week that other factors, like safety, funding, and overcoming the technical challenges that have so far prevented NASA from revisiting the Moon need to be considered.Bowersox – former astronaut, commander of both the space shuttle and the International Space Station, and former vice president of astronaut safety at SpaceX – told the committee that while it was good for NASA to have “that aggressive goal” as a deadline to urge the agency on, they still needed to be realistic.“What’s important is that we launch when we’re ready, that we have a successful mission when it launches, and I’m not going to sit here and tell you that just arbitrarily we’re going to make it,” he said. Though, he did add: “There’s a lot of risk in making the date, but we want to try to do it.”It’s no secret that the current president is more interested in a mission to Mars than the Moon, but a Moon landing is integral to NASA’s eventual plan to get there. Named Artemis, after Apollo’s sister, NASA’s Moon exploration mission has a two-phase plan: Land astronauts on the Moon in 2024, and establish a permanent lunar base by 2028.NASA and other space agencies are working on a new space station, called the Lunar Gateway, which will orbit the Moon. As well as a science lab and holding area for equipment like rovers, this will also provide a refueling station for spacecraft, and a break for astronauts, the journey to Mars being an estimated eight months. The Gateway is scheduled for assembly in 2022, with crewed missions taking place in 2024. However current plans suggest it won’t be complete until 2026.Other aspects that may hinder the tight 2024 deadline include a lack of rovers, landers, new spacesuits, and, vitally, NASA's much-delayed Space Launch System (SLS) – which will be the first to launch from US soil since 2011 – and is currently set to miss its launch date of 2020. Asked if private companies like SpaceX may actually beat NASA to the Moon, Bowersox still has faith in the agency, though.“I’d still bet on us – but they might be part of our program.”
Artistic rendering of the double asteroid Didymos. ESA – Science OfficeIn just a few years, humanity will try to safely change the orbit of an asteroid. The space rock is not dangerous; the test will simply assess if we have sound technology and models to actually deflect an asteroid if the need were to arise.The mission is part of the international Asteroid Impact and Deflection Assessment (AIDA) collaboration and members of the group recently presented some new ideas regarding AIDA at the European Planetary Science Congress & Division for Planetary Sciences of the American Astronomical Society Joint Meeting in Geneva.The new insights come from the recent observation of asteroids from the OSIRIS-REx and Hayabusa-2 missions. Hayabusa-2, in particular, shot an impactor at asteroid Ryugu to collect a subsurface sample. The effects of the impact are being studied and this will inform the first mission of AIDA, known as the Double Asteroid Redirection Test (DART).NASA’s DART will reach double asteroid Didymos in September 2022 and will impact the smaller of the two objects, Didymos B or Didymoon, and see if it can change its trajectory. Modeling what happened on Ryugu might be key to precisely working out what will happen to Didymoon.“The impact with Hayabusa2 showed that there was no cohesion on the surface and the regolith behaved like pure sand. Gravity was dominating the process, rather than the intrinsic strength of the material from which the asteroid is made,” Dr Patrick Michel who presented the findings said in a statement.“If gravity is also dominant at Didymos B, even though it is much smaller, we could end up with a much bigger crater than our models and lab-based experiments to date have shown. Ultimately, very little is known about the behaviour of these small bodies during impacts and this could have big consequences for planetary defence.”The DART mission will launch in July 2021 and will be accompanied by LICIACube (Light Italian Cubesat for Imaging Asteroids), a small satellite developed by the Italian Space Agency (ASI), which will be deployed just before impact so it can take images of the event.The second part of the AIDA mission involves the European Space Agency's Hera spacecraft, which, if approved, will arrive around the Didymos system in 2027 and will produce the most detailed assessment of the DART test.“DART and Hera will provide valuable knowledge individually," said ESA's Michael Kuppers. "However, when combined together through the AIDA collaboration, the scientific and technical benefits are enhanced considerably. In an even wider context, comparing the physical properties of Didymos to those of Ryugu from JAXA’s Hayabusa2 mission and the Bennu asteroid studies by NASA’s OSIRIS-REx mission will significantly contribute to our understanding of how single and multiple asteroid systems form and evolve.” 
Jupiter - PJ22-28 - Shadow of Io. NASA/JPL-Caltech/SwRI/MSSS/Kevin M. Gill CC BY 2.0NASA’s Juno mission continues to snap pictures of Jupiter, which citizen scientists have been processing into absolute masterpieces. In the latest perijove, when the spacecraft is at its closest point to the planet, Juno captured the shadow of the volcanic Moon Io on the atmosphere of Jupiter.On September 12, Io was blocking the Solar disk, casting its shadow on the colorful North Equatorial belt. Both Seán Doran and Kevin M. Gill shared beautiful views of the event, with a crisp silhouette of Io above the turbulent Jovian atmosphere.When we look at solar eclipses from space, their contours are fuzzy (at least on Earth). The solar eclipse on Jupiter looks significantly different due to the systematic difference between the two systems. Our Moon looks roughly the same size as the Sun as seen from Earth, which allows for a less distinct shadow.“Why is the Moon’s shadow on Earth fuzzy while Io’s shadow on Jupiter is so sharp? Io is so big & close that it more than blocks the Sun (it appears 4x as big as the Sun from Jupiter’s perspective) and it’s so close that the penumbra (fuzzy outer edge of shadow) is super thin,” astronomer Dr Katie Mack commented on a Twitter thread about the pictures.The images were shot using JunoCam's instrument onboard the NASA spacecraft. The camera allows for views in visible light, with an incredible resolution of about 15 kilometers (9 miles) per pixel. The raw data is sent to Earth where people like Doran and Gill process it. Anyone can get involved through the JunoCam website. You can even suggest points of interest for future observations.The spacecraft reached Jupiter in 2016. It performs a close flyby every 53 days with the next one happening on November 3, which will be the 23rd out of 35 planned flybys. The last one will take place on July 30, 2021, and will end in a controlled swan dive into the planet. This is to avoid any possible contamination of life-bearing worlds such as Jupiter’s moon Europa. 
Jupiter in all its glory. NASA/JPL-Caltech/SwRI/MSSS/Kevin M. GillOn August 7, Ethan Chappel was the only human to witness a planetary impact. He caught a small asteroid hitting Jupiter and producing a bright flash of light. Researchers have been able to use his observations to work out the size and type of meteorite and even how often these objects smash into the gas giant.Chappel was conducting video observations when he caught the flash, and used open-source software called DeTeCt to analyze his footage. DeTeCt was designed by fellow amateur astronomer Marc Delcroix and Ricardo Hueso from the University of Basque Country to study such impacts.The data were analyzed by the duo as well as independently by Ramanakumar Sankar and Csaba Palotai of the Florida Institute of Technology. The data point to a stony-iron meteorite 12-16 meters (39-52 feet) across weighing 450 tons. The meteorite disintegrated about 80 kilometers (50 miles) above Jupiter's clouds and released energy equivalent to 200–250 kilotons of TNT. That’s roughly half of the yield of the Chelyabinsk meteor or about 15 times the energy released by the Hiroshima nuclear bomb.“This is the first impact flash at Jupiter found using the DeTeCt software," Delcroix said in a statement. "These detections are extremely rare because the impact flashes are faint, short and can be easily missed while observing the planets for hours. However, once a flash is found in a video recording it can be analysed to quantify the energy required to make it visible at a distance of 700 million kilometres.” The project has been running for years and Delcroix and Hueso have now presented some results at the European Planetary Science Congress & Division for Planetary Sciences of the American Astronomical Society Joint Meeting 2019 in Geneva. They were able to give a better picture of impacts in the Jupiter and Saturn systems.  “With six impact flashes observed in 10 years since the first flash was discovered in 2010, scientists are becoming more confident in their estimates of the impact rate of these objects in Jupiter," said Hueso. "Most of these objects hit Jupiter without being spotted by observers on Earth. However, we now estimate 20-60 similar objects impact with Jupiter each year. Because of Jupiter’s large size and gravitational field this impact rate is 10,000 times larger than the impact rate of similar objects on Earth.” The two hope that more and more astronomers will employ DeTeCt so that the analysis can be refined.
To The Stars Academy/US NavyThe US Navy has confirmed that unsettling footage of UFOs that emerged over the last few years is real, and that they never meant for the video to be seen by the public.Footage first appearing online in 2017, picked up by the New York Times, showed several unidentified flying objects, or Unidentified Aerial Phenomena (UAP) as they are officially called, which appeared to be recorded by the US Navy. Three videos (one from 2004, two 2015), released to the New York Times by former Blink 182 Tom DeLonge's organization To The Stars Academy, show as yet unidentified flying objects, described by one of the trained fighter pilots as unlike anything he had ever seen in his life.Footage captured by US pilots on January 21, 2015.Footage also captured on January 21, 2015, by different US pilots, suggesting it's the same object."I can tell you, I think it was not from this world. I'm not crazy, haven't been drinking. [...] After 18 years of flying, I've seen pretty much about everything that I can see in that realm, and this was nothing close," retired Commander David Fravor told ABC News of the unidentified object he saw back in 2004."I have never seen anything in my life, in my history of flying that has the performance, the acceleration. Keep in mind this thing had no wings." A leaked report “prepared by and for the military” in 2018 detailed how the 13.7-meter-long (45-foot-long) Anomalous Aerial Vehicle (AAV) with "no visible means to generate lift" was seen by several US naval ships, as well as the F-18 jet Commander Fravor was in.“The AAVs would descend ‘very rapidly’ from approximately 60,000 feet [18,300 meters] down to approximately 50 feet [15 meters] in a matter of seconds,” the report reads, adding that a pilot noticed that the object, which resembled a Tic-Tac, disturbed the water causing “frothy waves and foam” beneath it, making it appear as if the ocean was "boiling”.Footage captured by a US Navy F/A-18 Super Hornet on November 14, 2004, off the coast of San Diego.The report on UAPs flying in US airspace had not been confirmed by the military until now. As first reported by Motherboard, a US Navy spokesperson told The Black Vault –  the largest civilian archive of declassified government documents – that the footage does show "unidentified aerial phenomena" that had been filmed by the Navy, and that "the Navy has not released the videos to the general public," it was the result of a leak.“The Navy designates the objects contained in these videos as unidentified aerial phenomena,” Deputy Chief of Naval Operations for Information Warfare Joseph Gradisher told The Black Vault. "The 'Unidentified Aerial Phenomena' terminology is used because it provides the basic descriptor for the sightings/observations of unauthorized/unidentified aircraft/objects that have been observed entering/operating in the airspace of various military-controlled training ranges."Of course, this doesn't mean that it's confirmed as aliens, just that – as yet – the government doesn't have an official explanation for what happened in the videos. “The Navy has not publicly released characterizations or descriptions, nor released any hypothesis or conclusions, in regard to the objects contained in the referenced videos," Gradisher said.However, we do know the US government takes these sightings seriously. Between 2008 and 2011 it spent nearly $22 million covertly investigating UFOs. In fact, UAP sightings have become so frequent in the last few years, the Navy recently drafted new guidelines for how to report them. 
ESA/Roscosmos/CaSSIS, CC BY-SA 3.0 IGOCookies and cream ice cream? Artisanal rippled white chocolate? Or springtime on Mars? This stunning image actually captures what happens when springtime arrives on everyone’s favorite Red Planet. Who knew Mars could look so delicious?Taken on May 25 by the joint ESA/Roscosmos ExoMars Trace Gas Orbiter’s CaSSIS camera, it shows the explosive activity that creates the distinctive black streaks across the creamy sand dunes of Mars’ north pole region as the temperatures warm up and the winter ice begins to melt.A thin atmosphere and lack of oceans to moderate temperatures make Mars a very cold planet. In the polar regions during the Martian winter, carbon dioxide freezes and builds up a thin layer of ice on the surface – essentially a layer of dry ice. Dry ice when it melts bypasses the liquid phase and turns directly from solid to gas, so as spring comes around and the temperatures start to warm up, the ice turns from solid to vapor, a process called sublimation.On Mars’ dune fields, this process starts from the bottom up, as the ice is nearly transparent, so the Sun’s rays can reach the bottom layer and heat up the surface of the sand below. As the bottom layer of the ice melts it traps the resulting CO2 between the sand and the ice above, building pressure.When the ice inevitably cracks, it releases the gas in geyser-like blasts that also carry grains of sand, which is what you can see as the dark streaks and patches in the CaSSIS image.The image also captures the merging of barchan dunes (on the right) into barchanoid ridges (on the left).As we know, Mars has sand and that sand is formed into dunes by the wind, much the same way it is on Earth. The crescent, or U-shaped, dunes are called barchan dunes, and they are formed when the sandy ground is relatively flat and there is a fairly constant wind source from one direction. The tips of the crescent show us which way the prevailing wind blows as the crescents always point downwind. These dunes are the most common type, and are found in every desert on Earth and all over Mars.Barchanoid ridges are formed when barchan dunes merge, producing longer wavy-looking ridges that look like rippled ice cream. The image, however, isn't just aesthetically pleasing, it provides useful information to scientists studying how conditions on Mars shape its landscape.“Dunes come in various characteristic shapes on Mars just as on Earth, providing clues about the prevailing wind direction. Monitoring them over time also gives us a natural laboratory to study how dunes evolve, and how sediments, in general, are transported around the planet,” ESA said in a statement accompanying the image.“The transition from barchan to barchanoid dunes tells us that secondary winds also play a role in shaping the dune field.”Springtime on Mars is now coming to an end in the Northern Hemisphere as the summer solstice (when Mars' north pole is at its maximum tilt towards the Sun) is due to take place on October 8. Then we can look forward to the low Sun and good lighting allowing for some spectacular images to be taken on Mars. 
The characteristic U-shape of the Loki volcano on Io, as snapped from the Voyager 1 flyby. NASA We may not know how to predict volcanic eruptions on Earth but it turns out we are pretty good at predicting eruptions elsewhere in the universe. The Loki volcano on Io, Jupiter's innermost molten moon, is expected to erupt at any moment according to planetary scientists’ predictions.The prediction that Loki is likely to erupt mid-September 2019 was presented this week at the European Planetary Science Congress & Division for Planetary Sciences of the American Astronomical Society Joint Meeting 2019 in Geneva by Dr Julie Rathbun of the Planetary Science Institute, who has been studying Loki for a long time.In her 2002 paper, she showed that throughout the 1990s an eruption happened every 540 days, and using over two decades of observations she has continued to make predictions and studied how the periodicity stops and changes over time. Currently, it appears to erupt every 475 days.  “Loki is the largest and most powerful volcano on Io, so bright in the infrared that we can detect it using telescopes on the Earth,” Dr Rathbun said in a statement. “If this behavior remains the same, Loki should erupt in September 2019, around the same time as the EPSC-DPS Joint Meeting 2019. We correctly predicted that the last eruption would occur in May of 2018.”Rathbun suggests Loki is so predictable because of its size. Loki is a huge volcanic depression 202 kilometers (126 miles) across. It’s a lava lake covered by a thin solidified crust, which breaks apart once in a while. The extensive size is believed to make Loki less affected by the small but numerous complications that regular volcanos have.“We think that Loki could be predictable because it is so large. Because of its size, basic physics are likely to dominate when it erupts, so the small complications that affect smaller volcanoes are likely to not affect Loki as much,” Rathbun said.“However," she cautioned, "you have to be careful because Loki is named after a trickster god and the volcano has not been known to behave itself.  In the early 2000s, once the 540-day pattern was detected, Loki’s behavior changed and did not exhibit periodic behavior again until about 2013.”Io is the most volcanically active place in the Solar System. Its internal heat is not the product of radioactive decay like on Earth but due to the tidal forces Jupiter and fellow moons Europa and Ganymede exert on Io. 
The latest portrait of Saturn by Hubble. NASA, ESA, A. Simon (Goddard Space Flight Center), and M.H. Wong (University of California, Berkeley)Saturn’s rings are the most striking, and certainly defining, characteristic of the second-largest planet in the Solar System. For many years it was believed that the rings were primordial, formed billions of years ago but recent analysis from the Cassini mission suggested that they are only 100 million years old.Cassini showed that material from the rings is raining down on the planet and, given the rate, such a ring system could only really exist for a short time. While the argument is compelling, other researchers are now arguing that this debate is far from settled. In a paper published in Nature Astronomy, they point out evidence also from Cassini suggesting that the rings are almost as old as the Solar System.“We can’t directly measure the age of Saturn’s rings like the rings on a tree-stump, so we have to deduce their age from other properties like mass and chemical composition," lead author Dr Aurélien Crida, of the Observatoire de la Côte d’Azur, said in a statement. "Recent studies have made assumptions that the dust flow is constant, the mass of the rings is constant, and that the rings retain all the pollution material that they receive. However, there is still a lot of uncertainty about all these points and, when taken with other results from the Cassini mission, we believe that there is a strong case that the rings are much, much older.”Using Cassini’s data, it has been estimated that the rings weigh 15 billion billion kilograms, similar to a medium asteroid or a very small moon. The team focuses on the mass and viscosity of the rings to try and estimate the time elapsed from their formation until now.The idea is that the rings will evolve over time. The inner edge rains down on the planet, the outer edge is lost to the moons and space. More massive rings lose mass faster. Interestingly the models employed show that no matter what the original mass is, over billions of years they will converge to a value consistent with what Cassini has measured.“From our present understanding of the viscosity of the rings, the mass measured during the Cassini Grand Finale would be the natural product of several billion years of evolution, which is appealing. Admittedly, nothing forbids the rings from having been formed very recently with this precise mass and having barely evolved since. However, that would be quite a coincidence,” added Dr Crida.In the study, the team differentiate about the formation age of the rings, the age of structures within the rings, and finally the exposure age given by the presence of material foreign to the ring. Confusion between these ages might be suggesting that the rings are younger than they actually are. 
Gemini Observatory two-color composite image of C/2019 Q4 (Borisov). Blue and red dashes are images of background stars which appear to streak due to the motion of the comet. Gemini Observatory/NSF/AURATwo weeks ago, a Crimean astronomer discovered C/2019 Q4, a high-speed space object that is likely to be the first interstellar comet and second interstellar object ever discovered. The body is getting closer and closer to the inner Solar System and is getting brighter, allowing for more observations.Astronomers at the Gemini Observatory have now delivered the first multicolored photograph of the object. The image was taken during the night between September 9 and 10 using the Gemini Multi-Object Spectrograph on the Gemini North Telescope on Hawaii’s Maunakea.The image was taken with two filters with four 60-second exposures which show perfectly its fuzzy appearance, bright core, and tail. These are all hallmarks of a comet. The tail suggests the comet is outgassing (releasing gas), something not seen at all from ‘Oumuamua, the first confirmed interstellar object, which passed through the inner Solar System two years ago.“This image was possible because of Gemini’s ability to rapidly adjust observations and observe objects like this, which have very short windows of visibility,” Andrew Stephens of the Gemini Observatory, who coordinated the observations, said in a statement. “However, we really had to scramble for this one since we got the final details at 3:00 am and were observing it by 4:45!”C/2019 Q4 is yet to be confirmed to be an interstellar object but its orbit and speed strongly suggest it is. The comet is over 400 million kilometers (250 million miles) from the Sun and its current velocity is about 150,000 kilometers (93,000 miles) per hour, much faster than any known Solar System object at that distance.NASA reported that the comet's nucleus is estimated to be between 2 and 16 kilometers (1.2-10 miles) across. The comet is coming in at a 40-degree angle with respect to the orbital plane of the Solar System, which it will cross on October 26. The closest it will get to the Sun is twice as far as the Earth on December 8, when it will be roughly 300 million kilometers (190 million miles) away.Researchers believe that at any given time there is at least one interstellar object within the orbit of Mars, though we will never see all of them as the vast majority are too small and faint to be spotted.
The cosmic snake. ESA/Hubble & NASAStars have different masses and colors, some live billions and billions of years, others are gone in a cosmic blink. No matter their differences they all start their lives in stellar nurseries, gigantic clouds of hydrogen and various other elements and molecules. But a new study reveals that not all molecular clouds are the same.As reported in Nature Astronomy, molecular clouds in distant galaxies sport significant differences compared to what we have observed in galaxies in the local universe. A distant galaxy known as the “Cosmic Snake,” located around 8 billion light-years away, could potentially be a Milky Way progenitor and its stellar nurseries have a mass, density, and turbulence 10 to 100 times higher than those in the nearby non-interactive galaxy.A typical molecular cloud in the Milky Way produces slightly more than 100 stars, but in star clusters in the younger universe, it appears that value is 100 times higher. Astronomers suspect this much higher number of stars produced has to do with the conditions in those galaxies. Far-off galaxies have more hostile extreme conditions, where only the denser clouds survive. They are also apparently more efficient, with 30 percent of the mass converted into stars, compared to just 5 percent in the local universe.“Such values had only been measured in clouds hosted in nearby interacting galaxies, which have interstellar medium conditions resembling those of distant galaxies,” lead author Miroslava Dessauges, from the University of Geneva, said in a statement. “A molecular cloud typically found in a nearby galaxy would instantly collapse and be destroyed in the interstellar medium of distant galaxies, hence its enhanced density and turbulence guarantee its survival and equilibrium.”“The characteristic mass of the molecular clouds in the Cosmic Snake appears to be in perfect agreement with the predictions of our scenario of fragmentation of turbulent galactic disks," added Lucio Mayer, a professor at the Centre for Physical and Cosmological Theory at the University of Zurich. "As a result, this scenario can be put forward as the mechanism of formation of massive molecular clouds in distant galaxies.”The observations were possible thanks to the Atacama Large Millimeter/submillimeter Array (ALMA) and the use of a gravitational lens. The Cosmic Snake is a gravitationally lensed galaxy whose light is coming to us from 8 billion light-years away. Between us and that galaxy, there is the dense cluster MACSJ1206.2-0847, which has warped space-time to such a degree to magnify the galaxy.“Gravitational lenses are a natural telescope that produces a magnifying-glass effect when a massive object is aligned between the observer and the distant object,” explained Dessauges. “With this effect, some parts of distant galaxies are stretched on the sky and can be studied at an unrivaled resolution of 90 light-years.”  
A beam of electromagnetic radiation from J0740+6620 points towards Earth every 2.8ms, but when its companion white dwarf passes through the beam it delays the signals in ways that reveal both stars' masses. BSaxton, NRAO/AUI/NSFWhen a giant star dies it turns into a neutron star or a black hole, depending on just how giant it is. There is still debate about the largest mass a neutron star can have without becoming a black hole. A new discovery, the most massive neutron star ever detected, may well be nudging up against that limit.J0740+6620 is a millisecond pulsar, a type of neutron star that spins so rapidly the beam of radiation it emits returns every 2.8 milliseconds. It's like a lighthouse, but one the size of a city and turning so fast we see its beam every 350th of a second.If J0740+6620 was voyaging through the cosmos solo that would be about all the information available. However, in February a white dwarf companion was announced. During its orbit, the white dwarf passes through the path of the beam on its way towards Earth, and the warping of spacetime it induces creates a delay in the signals reaching us. The extent of the delay allows us to measure the white dwarf’s mass, and from the speed of its orbit, to calculate J0740+6620's mass.In Nature Astronomy the discoverers calculate this at 2.17 times the mass on the Sun. For an ordinary star, that would not be all that impressive – it’s slightly greater than nearby Sirius, and stars of more than 100 solar masses are known. However, stellar giants shed most of their mass before they become neutron stars, so this is a record for the class.Moreover, J0740+6620 is just 30 kilometers (20 miles) across, with as much mass as all of humanity squeezed into a space the size of a sugar cube. The principal author of the paper, University of Virginia graduate student Thankful Cromartie, said in a statement: "These city-sized objects are essentially ginormous atomic nuclei. They are so massive that their interiors take on weird properties.”Calculating J0740+6620's mass so precisely was only possible because the orbits of the white dwarf and neutron star almost edge on to Earth. Other known pulsars may be similarly massive, but without the same orbital alignment, we can’t tell.However, astrophysicists have put considerable effort into calculating the point where a neutron star collapses into a black hole. Some models of the behavior of subatomic particles, that put this at less than two solar masses, had to be abandoned when a neutron star of 2.01 solar masses was discovered.
Melhijad / Shutterstock / Brian Reynolds / Flickr / Nye County Sheriff's Office / Facebook IFLScienceIn case you've been living inside Area 51 the past three months and have been unable to see the story of the year, here's a brief recap. In July an event was set up on Facebook to "storm Area 51 and see them aliens". The plan was that on September 20, 2019, all of the members of the event would show up at the military base and "naruto run" at it, with the genius assumption that they "can't stop all of us".It was a fairly funny joke, which then got seriously out of hand. First, there were endless memes that brought the event to everyone's attention. Then, before the organizer could say "it's a joke, please don't actually show up you'll get killed by the military", over a million people said they would attend. Eventually, the military felt the need to issue a response, and it even horribly affected PornHub searches.Now, with less than a week to go, there's slight concern that (though most people realize it's a joke) some people might actually show up. Especially as some people have already turned up and been arrested for trespassing, having made it about 5 kilometers (3 miles) inside the Air Force base property.The Nye County Sheriff's Office confirmed in a video statement that they had picked up and arrested the first wave of naruto runners: Two young men from the Netherlands. They are, of course, YouTubers."On September 10, 2019, the Nye County Sheriff's Office responded to the Nevada National Security Site for a report of foreign national trespassers," the Nye County Sheriff's Office said on Facebook.Deputies found a car parked near a gate approximately 3 miles into [the property]. Both told deputies that they spoke English and had seen the 'no trespassing' signs but "wanted to look at the facility". Twenty-one-year-old Govert Sweep and 20-year-old Ties Granzier, both YouTubers with hundreds of thousands of subscribers, were confirmed to be the pair."It has always been a dream to be here, now to crazy recordings of crazy adventures and ... area 51 ..." Granzier had previously written on Instagram.The arresting officers found several cameras, a phone, a laptop, and (why not) a drone inside their vehicle. Their cameras were searched, and footage taken inside the national security site property was found, shortly before they were arrested and charged with trespassing.The two were released on $500 bail the following day. Trespassing on a US military base could result in a $500 fine or up to six months in prison. Or, as they likely have many guns on-site, potentially much worse.
The NASA/ESA Hubble Space Telescope's Wide Field Camera 3 observed Saturn on June 20, 2019 as the planet made its closest approach to Earth this year, at approximately 1.36 billion kilometers away. NASA, ESA, A. Simon (Goddard Space Flight Center), and M.H. Wong (University of California, BerkeleyA newly unveiled image of Saturn captured by the Hubble Space Telescope shows the gaseous planet in all its pastel-colored glory.Snapped on June 20, 2019, the high-resolution image was captured using the telescope’s Wide Field Camera Three as Saturn was making its closest approach to Earth this year, just 1.36 billion kilometers (845 million miles) from Earth. Saturn’s famous ring system is visible as the planet tilts towards Earth, awarding a view of the rings’ bright, icy structure and fainter inner rings made up of orbiting particles of ice and dust indicative of gas planets. Though mesmerizing, astronomers say these images are more than just “beauty shots.”“They reveal a planet with a turbulent, dynamic atmosphere. This year's Hubble offering, for example, shows that a large storm visible in the 2018 Hubble image in the north polar region has vanished,” said NASA in a press release. “Smaller storms pop into view like popcorn kernels popping in a microwave oven before disappearing just as quickly. Even the planet's banded structure reveals subtle changes in color.” Also visible is a hexagon-shaped storm structure that has been circling the north pole of the planet for some time now. First observed in 1981, this mysterious six-sided pattern is believed to be caused by a high-speed Jetstream so large that four Earths could fit inside its boundaries – no similar structure has been spotted at planet’s south pole.Saturn is a planet that has intrigued and fascinated space scientists from around the world since its discovery in 1655 by Dutch astronomer Christiaan Huygens. In recent years, we have learned that one day on the planet lasts about 10.5 Earth hours and its magnetic fields make the planet’s winds flow like honey. Earlier this summer, Intricate structures were identified within Saturn’s seven rings, named A to G in the order of discovery.  This image is one of many once unimaginable photos of the ringed planet, a list that includes mosaics compiled from images taken by the now-defunct Cassini spacecraft and others that have led to a better understanding of the location of the planet.Going through the archives, an image taken in 2009 with Hubble’s Wide Field Planetary Camera 2 shows Saturn in details as small as 300 kilometers (186 miles) across its surface. Just 1.25 billion kilometers (777 million miles) from Earth at the time, the close-up shot shows the planet’s four moons transiting across the face. In the upper right side, the giant orange moon Titan – larger than the planet Mercury – is visible while the white icy moons are seen closer to Saturn. In order from left to right are Enceladus, Dione, and Mimas.More than a decade before that, an image captured on October 21, 1998, shows the ammonia ice and methane gas planet in its natural colors, highlighting the planet’s pastel bands of subtler yellows, browns, and grays. Similarly, a little black spot on the planet shows the shadow from Enceladus.
Comet C/2019 Q4 as imaged by the Canada-France-Hawaii Telescope on Hawaii's Big Island on Sept. 10, 2019. Credit: Canada-France-Hawaii TelescopeIt appears likely that ‘Oumuamua is not the only known interstellar object anymore. NASA has just provided more data regarding comet C/2019 Q4, and they think it is likely that the object originated far from the Solar System.The discovery of the object was reported just a few days back after it was first observed on August 30 by Gennady Borisov at the MARGO observatory in Nauchnij, Crimea. This is not an official confirmation that the object is truly interstellar but the speed estimate and orbital parameters are so far strongly leaning in that direction."The comet's current velocity is high, about 93,000 miles per hour [150,000 kilometers per hour], which is well above the typical velocities of objects orbiting the Sun at that distance," Davide Farnocchia of NASA's Center for Near-Earth Object Studies at JPL said in a statement. "The high velocity indicates not only that the object likely originated from outside our Solar System, but also that it will leave and head back to interstellar space."The object has a fuzzy appearance suggesting it has a core of ice materials that are evaporating as it gets closer to the Sun. It is currently 420 million kilometers (260 million miles) from our star coming in at a 40-degree angle with respect to the plane of the ecliptic (the orbit of the Earth), which C/2019 Q4 will cross on October 26. It will then reach its closest point to the Sun on December 8, being roughly 300 million kilometers (190 million miles) away, double the average distance between us and our star."The object will peak in brightness in mid-December and continue to be observable with moderate-size telescopes until April 2020," added Farnocchia. "After that, it will only be observable with larger professional telescopes through October 2020."Observations by Karen Meech and her team at the University of Hawaii led to the estimation that the comet's nucleus is between 2 and 16 kilometers (1.2-10 miles) across. For better estimates of its size as well as other properties such as its rotation, we will have to wait for more observations.When ‘Oumuamua was first discovered, researchers were able to estimate that at any given time there is at least one interstellar object within the orbit of Mars, but most of these will be too small and faint to be discovered. 
László Francsics (Hungary) with Into the Shadow, Winner in Our Moon category and Overall Winner.The Royal Observatory Greenwich has announced the 12 winners of the Insight Investment Astronomy Photographer of the Year 2019. Touching on the many areas of astrophotography, the winning pictures are, as always, breathtaking and awe-inspiring, telling stories about the sky and our relationship with it. Pictures may be worth a thousand words, and in some of these even more than that. The overall winner and winner of the "Our Moon" category is Hungarian photographer László Francsics, who takes home the £10,000 (about $12,500) prize money. The winning image is a composite view stitching together 35 phases of the total lunar eclipse that occurred on January 21, 2019. “The original composition, the quality of the shots themselves, the chromatic and visual impact, all make for a photograph that will catch the viewer's eye and interest,” competition judge Oana Sandu from the European Southern Observatory (ESO), said in an emailed statement.  The competition, sponsored by Insight Investment in association with BBC's Sky at Night Magazine, is now in its 11th year. In 2019, it received an incredible 4,600 entries from over 90 countries and the judges certainly had a tough time picking the most beautiful pictures across the nine different categories and two special prizes. Each winner receives £1,500 ($1,880) in prize money, with the runners-up receiving £500 ($630) and the highly commended entries getting £250 ($315). The winning entries include an amazing composite progress picture taken by Andy Casely of the global dust storm that enveloped Mars last year and led to the death of NASA's rover Opportunity, and a stunning panorama/self-portrait featuring the Milky Way's core, Mars, Saturn, photographer Ben Bush, and his dog Floyd, which took home the People & Places crown. The Young Astronomy Photographer of the Year goes to 11-year-old Davy van der Hoeven from the Netherlands for a beautiful picture of the Rosette Nebula, 5,000 light-years away. Particularly impacting, Wang Zheng's "Across the Sky of History", starring a meteorite falling behind the withered poplar trees of the Ejina region in Inner Mongolia, won in the Skyscapes category. “Every year the standard rises, and entrants continue to find creative new ways to express their artistry,"  judge Tom Kerss, an astronomer at the Royal Observatory, said. "This year’s selection contains so many unique approaches to astrophotography – real love letters to the art form, which stay with you long after you’ve seen them. I’m looking forward to the discussions these images will inspire about our shared sky, and the ever-expanding field of capturing and interpreting it. With such a beautiful collection to talk about, the competition really has become astrophotography’s ‘World Cup’."You can check out all the winning photographs for each category below. These, plus the runners-up and highly commended shots, will be part of an exhibition at the National Maritime Museum, next door to the Royal Observatory Greenwich, in London from September 13, 2019 to April 26, 2020. The photos will also be published in a book available later in the year. You can see all the winning images below. Aurorae Nicolai Brügger (Germany) with The Watcher. View of the Aurora Borealis over the Lofoten Islands from top of the mountain Offersøykammen in Norway.Nicolai Brügger (Germany) with The Watcher Galaxies Rolf Wahl Olsen (Denmark) with Shells of Elliptical Galaxy NGC 3923 in Hydra. Rolf Wahl Olsen (Denmark) with Shells of Elliptical Galaxy NGC 3923 in Hydra Our Sun Alan Friedman (USA) with A Little Fireworks. A close-up of the solar limb in the solar minimum period of the Sun’s cycle.Alan Friedman (USA) with A Little FireworksPeople and SpaceBen Bush (UK)) with Ben, Floyd and the Core. Starring Bush, his dog Floyd, Mars, Saturn, and the galactic core of Milky Way.  Ben Bush (UK)) with Ben, Floyd and the CorePlanets, Comets and AsteroidsAndy Casely (Australia) with Death of Opportunity. Sequence of images through the perihelic opposition of Mars in 2018 that followed the huge dust storm that ultimately killed the Opportunty rover. SkyscapesWang Zheng (China) with Across the Sky of History. Taken in the Mongolian region of Ejina, in the historical Kingdom of Xi Xia, a meteor is falling behind withered poplar trees. Stars and Nebulae Ignacio Diaz Bobillo (Argentina) with Statue of Liberty Nebula.  The Sir Patrick Moore Prize for Best Newcomer Special Prize - Joint WinnersShuchang Dong (China) with Sky and Ground, Stars and Sand (top), and Ross Clark (UK) with The Jewels of Orion (below)The Robotic Scope Special PrizeLászló Francsics (Hungary) with Infrared. Showing Saturn in all its infrared glory. Young Astronomy Photographer Davy van der Hoeven, age 11 (Netherlands) with Stellar Flower. The Rosette Nebula, NGC 2244, an open star cluster, is found in the Monoceros region of the Milky Way. 
Watchara Tongnoi/ShutterstockResearchers recently observed a peculiar flare from Sagittarius A*, the supermassive black hole at the center of the Milky Way. Last May, they watched as the supermassive black hole increased in brightness and then quickly dimmed over just a few hours.As reported in a new paper published in the Astrophysical Journal Letters, something has changed in the environment around Sagittarius A*. For over 20 years, researchers have been monitoring the infrared emissions of our friendly neighborhood supermassive black hole, and it appears that this year it became significantly more active.The May flare was twice the brightness of the previous record holder for a black hole. The team looked at more than 13,000 observations over 133 nights since 2003. There have been two other bright nights this year, although not quite as remarkable as May 13.“We have never seen anything like this in the 24 years we have studied the supermassive black hole,” Andrea Ghez, UCLA professor of physics and astronomy and a co-senior author of the research, said in a statement. “It’s usually a pretty quiet, wimpy black hole on a diet. We don’t know what is driving this big feast.”The team found evidence that suggests the changes witnessed this year are unlikely to be the norm, at least following the current model for Sagittarius A*. There is only a probability of 0.05 percent for these observations to be part of a standard, unchanging behavior for a celestial body.“The first image I saw that night, the black hole was so bright I initially mistook it for the star S0-2, because I had never seen Sagittarius A* that bright,” added lead author Tuan Do, also at UCLA. “But it quickly became clear the source had to be the black hole, which was really exciting.”And S0-2 is being accused of having something to do with it. This star orbits close to the supermassive black hole, close enough in fact for the team to use it as a test-ground for general relativity. The star had its closest passage last year, which might have pushed some material into the jaws of the supermassive black hole.An alternative suggestion is that we are witnessing a delayed reaction from the close passage of the dusty object G2 in 2014. The team is quite upfront in saying that maybe it’s the model that actually needs updating. As is often the case in astronomy, more observations will provide new insights to reach a satisfactory answer.
Simulation of the black hole merger observed by LIGO known as GW150914.Credit: SXS, the Simulating eXtreme Spacetimes (SXS) projectSpace-time is constantly being strummed by all the events that are happening in the universe. The vibrations, which we call gravitational waves, resonate across the cosmos. Since the first direct detection of gravitational waves in 2015 – and the following discoveries of several collisions between black holes, neutron stars, and each other since then – we have been able to listen to the “sounds” of these events.Now, for the first time, researchers have detected two tones from a newly formed black hole. It had previously been assumed that just one tone could be detected, and any others would be too faint for our current technology to pick up.The gravitational event GW150914 that kicked it all off in 2015 saw a collision between two black holes, one weighing 36 times our Sun and the other one 29, sending quivers through space. The merge created a single black hole releasing a mindboggling amount of energy as gravitational waves."A new black hole forms out of a violent astrophysical process and thus is in an agitated state," lead author of the first paper, Maximiliano Isi, from MIT, said in a statement. "However, it quickly sheds this surplus energy in the form of gravitational waves."Most of the energy was in the “chirp”, the emission from the instance of the merger but some of it came from the "ringdown", the overtones produced by the black hole settling in, which researchers managed to detect and detail in two new papers: One, discussing finding them in the signal from GW150914 (published in Physical Review Letters) and the other detailing the technique used to hunt for them (published in Physical Review X)."This was a very surprising result. The conventional wisdom was that by the time the remnant black hole had settled down so that any tones could be detected, the overtones would have decayed away almost completely," said Saul Teukolsky, a professor of physics at Cornell University. "Instead, it turns out that the overtones are detectable before the main tone becomes visible."The overtones were assumed too weak to be detected within the current gravitational wave data, but the model developed for the ringdown by the team allowed them to spot the signal amidst the noise. The chance that the detection is a fluke is about 1 in 5,000, which is quite good but not yet the gold-standard level expected in particles physics.The data and model are good enough to estimate the properties of the newly formed black hole, which were in agreement with what was discovered from the rest of the gravitational wave detection. The ringdown was also used to test the no-hair theorem, the idea that whatever falls into the black hole is permanently inaccessible. This is the expectation from general relativity but doesn’t sit well with quantum mechanics. The team admits that better accuracy in future observations might completely overhaul this idea."Einstein's theory could break down if there are quantum effects at play," lead author of the second paper Matthew Giesler, from Caltech, explained. "Newton's theory of gravity passes many tests where gravity is weak, but completely fails when it comes to describing gravity at its most extreme, like when it comes to trying to describe merging black holes. Similarly, as we eventually probe the signal from black holes with increasing accuracy, it is possible that even general relativity might someday fail the test."The approach detailed in these papers is yet another way to understand the universe through gravitational waves, and we are still very much in the overture of this exciting field.
Artist's impression of an exoplanet. NASA/JPL-CaltechThere are many challenges to work out where life can evolve elsewhere in the Universe, including the fact that we only have one example of where such a circumstance has happened before: Earth. Now a team of researchers from Harvard University has investigated the size of possibly habitable worlds, in particular taking a closer look at what is the smallest planet possible that can be habitable. The findings are reported in The Astrophysical Journal.The team worked with the assumption that for life to evolve on a planet within the habitable zone of its star, it must have liquid water on its surface for at least 1 billion years. For this to happen, the planet needs to hold on to its atmosphere – below a certain threshold, planets can't do that. The team put that lower limit at 2.68 percent of Earth-mass, or slightly more than twice the mass of the Moon.“When people think about the inner and outer edges of the habitable zone, they tend to only think about it spatially, meaning how close the planet is to the star,” lead author Constantin Arnscheidt said in a statement. “But actually, there are many other variables to habitability, including mass. Setting a lower bound for habitability in terms of planet size gives us an important constraint in our ongoing hunt for habitable exoplanets and exomoons.”The habitable zone of a star is the region where the radiation emitted by the star is enough to allow a planet to have water in all three states. It is also known as the Goldilocks zone because a planet cannot be too hot or too cold, but needs to be just right. Depending on the type of star, these can be much closer to it than in the Solar System. But while we think this is a necessary condition, it is not sufficient, which is why it's important to take atmospheres into account."Our study focused on the definition of habitability as the ability to maintain surface liquid water on timescales relevant to the evolution of life. If a planet were sufficiently small, it would be unable to maintain surface liquid water regardless of the distance from its star. The critical mass beyond which this occurs, therefore, sets a fundamental limit on this kind of habitability," Arnscheidt told IFLScience.Atmospheres have a Goldilocks range as well. If an atmosphere absorbs more heat than it can radiate, it might lead to a runaway greenhouse effect and evaporate all the water. Or the atmosphere might be slowly eroded away from its star, which could lead to a frigid, dry world like Mars.Small planets orbiting in the closer edge of the habitable zone can escape the runaway greenhouse effect, but only within the range described in this paper. Once they get too small, they can no longer hold on to their atmospheres. This work doesn't consider the possibility of life in subsurface ocean like the one on Saturn's moon Enceladus. "In this study, we modeled conditions for surface liquid water only. There is a whole other community of scientists working on the possibility of life in subsurface oceans. However, biospheres on exoplanets or exomoons would likely require surface liquid water to be detectable remotely, because of the low productivity of subsurface ocean biospheres," Arnscheidt explained to us. Telescope technology is not yet able to find these limit worlds, but in the coming decades, we are likely to find plenty of them and check whether this hypothesis is indeed correct.
A radio image of the centre of the Milky Way with a portion of the MeerKAT telescope array in the foreground. Adapted from results published in Heywood et al. 2019.Sagittarius A* is the supermassive black hole at the center of the Milky Way. Compared to many supermassive black holes in other galaxies, it is remarkably quiet, but this wasn’t always the case. An international collaboration of researchers has found evidence of intense activity in the last few million years.As reported in the journal Nature, scientists used the MeerKAT telescope to spot two balloon-like structures towering hundreds of light-years above and below the core of the galaxy. The two bubbles are too similar to be unrelated and the team found an energy signature that can only be explained by some powerful process.“The centre of our galaxy is calm when compared to other galaxies with very active central black holes,” lead author Ian Heywood of the University of Oxford, said in a statement. “Even so, the Milky Way’s central black hole can – from time to time – become uncharacteristically active, flaring up as it periodically devours massive clumps of dust and gas. It’s possible that one such feeding frenzy triggered powerful outbursts that inflated this previously unseen feature.”The team looked at wavelengths around 23 centimeters (9 inches), a radio emission associated with synchrotron radiation. When electrons are moving close to the speed of light within powerful magnetic fields, they end up in helical orbit and emit radio waves.The discovery also sheds new light on the radio filaments seen around the center of the Milky Way. These are narrow structures seen at the core and nowhere else in our galaxy. Most of them are contained completely within the volume of the bubbles, and it is very likely that whatever event created the bubbles also accelerated the electrons in the filaments.“These enormous bubbles have until now been hidden by the glare of extremely bright radio emission from the centre of the galaxy,” co-author Fernando Camilo, from the South African Radio Astronomy Observatory in Cape Town, explained. “Teasing out the bubbles from the background noise was a technical tour de force, only made possible by MeerKAT’s unique characteristics and ideal location. With this discovery, we’re witnessing in the Milky Way a novel manifestation of galaxy-scale outflows of matter and energy, ultimately governed by the central black hole.”From end to end, the bubbles stretch about 1,400 light-years. While these bubbles are impressive, they are not the only bubbles present around the Milky Way. The so-called Fermi bubbles stretch for 25,000 light-years, created by a powerful eruption of material from Sagittarius A*. These new bubbles might have been created by a less energetic version of the same event.
Artist’s impression shows the planet K2-18b, its host star, and an accompanying planet in the system. ESA/Hubble, M. KornmesserA team of astronomers from University College London have discovered water molecules in the atmosphere of a nearby exoplanet, a super-Earth twice the size of our planet and eight times its mass. This object is located in the habitable zone of its host star, making this the first detection of water in a world that could potentially host life.The planet is known as K2-18b and is located 110 light-years away. It orbits its red dwarf star every 33 days and has a companion planet, a second super-Earth that is closer to the star and likely too hot to support life. As reported in Nature Astronomy, the team studied K2-18b's atmosphere and detected a clear water signature.“Finding water in a potentially habitable world other than Earth is incredibly exciting,” said lead author Dr Angelos Tsiaras in a statement. “K2-18b is not ‘Earth 2.0’ as it is significantly heavier and has a different atmospheric composition. However, it brings us closer to answering the fundamental question: Is the Earth unique?”The team tested several models for the planet’s atmosphere, with water content varying from 50 percent to as little as 0.01 percent. For reference, Earth’s values are between 0.01 and 4 percent. Some of these models had clouds and some didn't, but realistically it's probably not extremely cloudy as the atmosphere is transparent enough for water emissions to be visible.There is also the question about the nature of this super-Earth. We don’t have the technology to image the planet directly so we can’t tell what the planet is like. Given that it has the density of Mars, it most likely has a solid surface. However, just because there’s water in its atmosphere, that doesn’t mean there is water on its surface. The team admits more data is needed to truly understand K2-18b.“With so many new super-Earths expected to be found over the next couple of decades, it is likely that this is the first discovery of many potentially habitable planets. This is not only because super-Earths like K2-18b are the most common planets in our galaxy, but also because red dwarfs – stars smaller than our Sun – are the most common stars,” co-author Dr Ingo Waldmann added.The planet was first discovered during the K2 mission using NASA’s Kepler telescope. Follow-up studies slowly revealed its nature, but there was plenty left to uncover. This team used data collected by the Hubble Space Telescope over eight transits of the planet across the disk of its star. The data is part of a larger spectroscopic survey on low-mass planets. The Principal Investigator of the data, Björn Benneke, Assistant Professor at Université de Montréal, and his team released a pre-print paper of their findings, submitted to The Astrophysical Journal, showing that water is indeed present in the atmosphere of K2-18 b and it could possibly rain down on the planet surface.“Thanks to our observations and our climate model of this planet, we have shown that its water vapour can condense into liquid water. This is a first,” Benneke said in a statement.
Artist's concept of a lake at the north pole of Saturn's moon Titan, illustrating raised rims and rampart-like features such as those seen by NASA's Cassini spacecraft around the moon's Winnipeg Lacus. NASA/JPL-CaltechTitan is the largest moon of Saturn, the second-largest moon in the Solar System, and is very peculiar. Its dense atmosphere makes it hard to study, but it's the only known body aside from Earth with liquid features on its surface. Though as it’s so cold there, the lakes and rivers are made of methane rather than water.A particularly interesting feature of some of these lakes is their edges. Some of these bodies of methane have steep rims tens of meters in height, which are difficult to explain. As reported in Nature Geoscience, researchers saw similarities between these basins and explosion craters formed by interactions between magma and water.Using data from Cassini, they think that on Titan, the explosions would likely be produced by pockets of liquid nitrogen trapped under the surface. It's believed that the Saturnine moon experiences colder and warmer periods (although still cold by our standards). The team thinks that during warm periods, ground-trapped liquid nitrogen expanded quickly, blowing holes in Titan’s surface.The evidence is in the rims, which are raised compared to the surrounding regions. The previous theory saw them as analogous to Earth’s karst lakes, which are formed when subterranean caves collapse due to the rocks being dissolved in water."The rim goes up, and the karst process works in the opposite way," lead author Giuseppe Mitri, from G. d'Annunzio University in Italy, said in a statement. "We were not finding any explanation that fit with a karstic lake basin. In reality, the morphology was more consistent with an explosion crater, where the rim is formed by the ejected material from the crater interior. It's totally a different process."  The observational data that allowed this analysis was collected by the Saturn-studying Cassini mission, an international collaboration between NASA, and the European and Italian Space Agencies, that ended two years ago this week with a planned death dive into the planet's atmosphere. Not that that's stopped it from supplying us with plenty more data. Cassini’s radar data is so good, that researchers can really zoom in on features like these lakes, challenging previous assumptions with more explosive ones.
Markus Gann/ShutterstockOver the last couple of decades, we have discovered many high-velocity stars, stars so fast that they can quickly exceed their birth cluster and even leave the disk of their galaxy. PG1610+062 is one such object. It left the Sagittarius spiral arm in the Milky Way with a velocity of 550 kilometers (342 miles) per second, almost enough to escape the gravitational pull of our galaxy.Researchers believe the star was kicked out from its original birthplace by an interaction with a mid-mass black hole (MMBH), an object bigger than a black hole formed by a supernova but certainly not as big as Sagittarius A*, the supermassive black at the center of the Milky Way.As reported in Astronomy & Astrophysics, using the European Space Agency’s Gaia spacecraft the scientists reconstructed the region of origin of the star and it is nowhere near the center of the galaxy. The team was also able to estimate the acceleration that PG1610+062 must have experienced. This couldn’t have been produced by a supernova or another a binary system giving a kick to this star. These two facts strongly suggest that a MMBH was responsible for the acceleration.“Now, PG1610+062 may provide evidence that MMBHs could indeed exist in our galaxy. The race is on to actually find them,” lead author Andreas Irrgang of the Friedrich-Alexander University of Erlangen-Nuremberg in Germany, said in a statement.MMBHS or intermediate-mass black holes are expected to have masses between 100 and 100,000 times that of our Sun. They are giants from our human perspective but still a fraction of the size of supermassive black holes. For comparison, Sagittarius A* is over 4 million solar masses and there are black holes weighing billions of times our Sun. Few of these candidate objects have been found but given that black holes are by definition black, it has been very difficult to confirm their presence with certainty.PG1610+062 was also studied using the Keck Observatory in Hawaii. Researchers first thought that this was an old small star, which is pretty typical for the halo, the spherical region around the Milky Way. The data obtained instead revealed a young massive star, between four and five solar masses.While this star is moving really fast, faster stars are known. Some hyper-velocity stars move at almost double the velocity registered by PG1610+062.
FOTOKITA/ShutterstockInternational efforts to look for aliens have so far been met with radio silence. Despite intriguing signals (that occasionally turn out to be from microwave ovens in observatory tea rooms), so far no likely candidates for intelligent life contacting Earth have been identified, nor any signs of advanced aliens minding their own business. Yes, that includes Boyajian's star.Aliens, it's fair to say, have not been chatty.If aliens were to be discovered, however, it's not clear what we would like to happen next. A new survey in the UK carried out by researchers from the University of Oxford sought to find out what the British public would like to happen in the event E.T. did get in touch. In what came close to the cursed 48-52 percent split that has haunted British politics for the past three years, they found that just over half (53.6 percent) of people would want us to respond to communication from aliens. The poll, which was conducted on 2,000 people in the UK, found that men were more likely to want to touch base with extraterrestrials than women (55 percent of men vs 47 percent of women). Because "why not", the survey also compared its results with how people voted in the 2016 Brexit referendum. They found a reasonable split between the two groups of voters, with 66 percent of remain voters saying that they would vote to initiate contact with aliens, whilst only 54 percent of leave voters said they'd do the same, if a worldwide referendum on the issue was held.However, after several years of Brexit chaos, it appears the UK has learned its lesson: Do not put complex questions with many uncertain outcomes to a public yes/no vote in the first place.The survey, conducted by Survation, found that just 11 percent of UK participants thought there should be a referendum on the topic, should we receive a message from the skies. Of the options posed, the most popular choice was to put a team of scientists in charge of this vital decision-making, with 39.3 percent of participants saying they favored it, much more than the 14.8 percent of people who thought the decision should be made by elected representatives.“It is a bit surprising the option that nominally gives the average voter the most influence in the process was one of the least popular,” said Dr Leah Trueblood, who commissioned the survey along with astrophysicist Dr Peter Hatfield, discussing their results at the British Science Festival this week, the Guardian reports.“Referendums are of course particularly controversial in the UK right now. It would be interesting to try this in other countries to see if the results are about the same.”Were it to be put to a referendum (oh god) they found that 56.3 percent would vote in favor of contact, with just 13 percent saying they would vote against it. Weirdly, 9.2 percent said they would not vote in the referendum.“It’s a small poll but it’s reassuring that people feel they can trust scientists to make these big decisions," Dr Hatfield said. Although maybe, after years of Brexit mess, they just don't trust how the public would vote?
Estimates of the path of gb00234 are subject to change as more data comes in, but the green hyperbola indicates the best estimate we have. Jupiter is in pink and Neptune in blue. Tony 8730004 via Wikimedia commons. CC-by-SA-4.0On August 30 astronomers at the Crimean Astrophysical Observatory detected what looked like a perfectly ordinary comet. However, excitement is rising with each new observation of its movement through the skies. Astronomers now think the object currently known as gb00234 has a hyperbolic orbit, meaning it comes from outside the Solar System, only the second such object we have observed. Better yet, it is coming closer, and by the end of the year it could be so bright you can see it with a backyard telescope.The discovery of Oumuamua in 2017 was a historic development, the first time humanity had knowingly observed a visitor to the Solar System. The fact that it was such an unusual object, with a length to width ratio greater than any local comet or asteroid, added to the excitement – even feeding claims this was an alien spacecraft, although few astronomers take this idea seriously after no radio signals were found.There was, however, one disappointing aspect to the whole event. We only noticed how unusual Oumuamua's orbit was when it was already past the Sun and on the way out, limiting opportunities for study. If gb00234 (not to be confused with the women's running shoe of the same name) really is interstellar, this time things will be very different. Gb00234 is on its way in, and will make its closest approach to the Sun either late this year or early in 2020 – some predictions even have it occurring on New Year's Day.There are still question marks over gb00234's interstellar status because it is around 3.5 astronomical units (the radius of the Earth's orbit) from the Sun. Moreover, like all comets, it is a slightly fuzzy blob, rather than a sharp point, which makes precise measurements of its position hard. Nevertheless, the data we now have suggests this has a velocity in interstellar space slightly greater than Oumuamua's, and a much higher eccentricity – two measures used to identify objects from outside the Solar System. The brightness of comets is notoriously hard to predict – generations of amateur astronomers have been disappointed at those that failed to live up to expectations. That goes double when we still have enormous error bars on how close to the Earth gb00234 will get. However, there is a high chance at its peak it will be visible with small amateur telescopes. If so, the Southern Hemisphere is likely to get the best view.Update: Gb00234 has now been renamed C/2019 Q4 (Borisov) with an official, although still preliminary, orbit plotted by the International Astronomical Union's Minor Planet Center. This proposed orbit would be very hard to explain for an object whose origins lie within the Solar System.
This year's Harvest Moon is expected to be much smaller than the supermoon that rose over Half Dome in Yosemite National Park in November 2016. Phitha Tanpairoj/ShutterstockThis Friday, moon gazers in the Northern Hemisphere will be treated by a doubly special full moon as the Harvest Moon coincides with the notoriously superstitious Friday the 13th, an occurrence that only happens once in every 20 years, according to the Farmer’s Almanac.The Harvest Moon marks the beginning of fall as the days get shorter and the air gets crisper. (At least for the northern half of the world. For those living in the Southern Hemisphere, the Harvest Moon generally occurs in March or early April.) This year’s autumnal equinox is on September 23, and a brightly lit Harvest Moon will allow harvesters ample time to work late into the night collecting the last of this year’s summertime crops. Some sources say the famous moon traces back to ancient Native American tradition, though modern records indicate Anglo-Saxons recorded its occurrence as early as the 8th century, according to timeanddate.com.Like any other full moon, a number of factors characterize the Harvest Moon, particularly the time of moonrise. During most of the year, the moon rises around 50 minutes later each day. Near the equinox, the Harvest Moon rises closer to sunset, according to EarthSky.org. Those living in mid-temperate latitudes may even see the moonrise just 25 to 30 minutes later in the day – high northern altitudes, even less.This year’s Harvest Moon is also a “micro-“ or “mini-moon” and will appear 14 percent smaller than other full moons in 2019. This is because the Moon will be at its greatest distance from the Earth.“The Moon will be full early Saturday morning, September 14, 2019, appearing "opposite" the Sun (in Earth-based longitude) at 12:33 AM EDT. The Moon will appear full for about three days centered around this time, from Thursday night through Sunday morning,” according to NASA Science.The agency notes that the brightest planet in the sky on September 14 will be Jupiter, “appearing in the south-southwest at about 24 degrees above the horizon.” Saturn will also appear in the south at around 29 degrees above the horizon.
The FAST observatory in China. VCG/Getty ImagesChina’s humongous radio telescope has reaped an impressive harvest of special signals from a galaxy 3 billion light-years away. The signals, known as fast radio bursts (FRBs), are extremely short but very powerful emissions of radio waves. Even though we're still not sure what FRBs actually are, or where they come from, these particular signals were traced to emitter FRB 121102, one of the few FRBs that have been caught repeating.The Five-hundred-meter Aperture Spherical Radio Telescope (FAST) has been scanning the patch of sky where FRB 121102 originates and was able to detect more than 100 signals between August 30 and the first few days of September. This is the highest number of bursts detected so far for this source, with 20 pulses observed on September 3 alone.FRB 121102 is one of only 10 known FRBs and the first one to be discovered. The fact that it is repeating made it possible to find its origin, a dwarf galaxy 3 billion light-years from Earth, and its likely source, a neutron star moving through an incredibly powerful magnetic field. There are still uncertainties about how these bursts are produced, however, and much more data, like these observations FAST collected, is needed.FAST is the most sensitive listening device in the world. The single-radio dish is built in the Dawodang depression, Guizhou province, south-west China and measures 600 meters (1,968 feet) across, making it the world's largest telescope. As of yesterday, the telescope is considered fully operational by Chinese scientists and has been submitted for a national review, where it will move from being an under-construction project to a full working facility."Once we pass this review, FAST becomes an accepted telescope for exploring the Universe,” JIANG Peng, FAST’s chief engineer and deputy director of FAST Operation and Development Center, NAOC, said in a statement. “FAST has been open to Chinese astronomers since April 2019. After the National Construction Acceptance, it will be open to astronomers across the world.”FRBs are some of the most incredible astronomical events we have ever observed. They last for just a fraction of a second. Recent estimates suggest that maybe over 150 such events could be seen from Earth every day. Given than most of these are a one-off, finding them is just a matter of serendipity, looking at the right spot at the right time.Detections of these events have increased in the last few years, and we are now also capable of following up the detection in real-time. We are yet to have a complete picture of FRBs but we are gaining more and more insight with each new observation.  
The host galaxy. The square indicates the location of the neutron star collision. Wen-fai Fong/Northwestern UniversityIn October 2017, researchers announced the first discovery of a collision between two neutron stars. The momentous detection was possible thanks to the combined power of the LIGO and Virgo gravitational observatories, as well as a large number of observatories across all wavelengths of light.It was not just about catching the event in the act, but continuing observations for months after the merger. The immediate bright emission and afterglow revealed much about the nature of the event. Researchers will now publish the full analysis of the afterglow in visible light this month in The Astrophysical Journal Letters.The merger, called GW170817, saw two neutron stars colliding, creating a black hole and throwing a huge amount of heavy elements and powerful electromagnetic radiation into space. The collision was a kilonova, 1,000 times brighter than a classical nova. The kilonova itself shined for over three months, transitioning afterward to a weaker afterglow.The collision released a jet of material moving at almost the speed of light. This hit the surrounding interstellar medium, making it glow – the afterglow this research focused on. Such observations required the power and sensitivity of the Hubble Space Telescope.“This is the deepest exposure we have ever taken of this event in visible light,” lead author Wen-fai Fong, assistant professor at Northwestern University, said in a statement. “The deeper the image, the more information we can obtain.”The team had to work hard to remove every source of contamination, especially the one coming from the host galaxy. The work, however, paid off. The analysis showed that these two neutron stars were quite isolated from other objects in the galaxy.“Previous studies have suggested that neutron star pairs can form and merge within the dense environment of a globular cluster,” Fong said. “Our observations show that’s definitely not the case for this neutron star merger.”While the event produced plenty of data linking neutron star collisions to short gamma-ray bursts, there were also some unexpected findings, possibly due to the angle of view. Usually, we see gamma-ray bursts down the “barrel of the gun”, but this one was seen at a 30-degree angle.“GW170817 is the first time we have been able to see the jet ‘off-axis,’” Fong said. “The new time-series indicates that the main difference between GW170817 and distant short gamma-ray bursts is the viewing angle.”
Simulation of the Epoch of Reionisation. Neutral hydrogen (red) is gradually ionized by the first stars (white). The image was made by the University of Melbourne’s Dark-ages Reionisation And Galaxy Observables from Numerical Simulations (DRAGONS) program. Paul Geil and Simon MutchThere are still many things that we do not understand about the first few hundred million years after the Big Bang, and one particular observation that is lacking is seeing the first stars. We have some ideas of what they might be like but as of yet, we haven’t seen them directly.They lived too far in the past and died too quickly. Our instruments are not yet good enough to spot them. In the meantime, however, we are improving how to spot them indirectly. The Murchinson Widefield Array, a radio observatory in Australia, has seen a 10-fold improvement on the data from the early universe. This improvement is reported in a paper currently available to read on the preprint server ArXiv, soon to be published in The Astrophysical Journal.The observatory was designed with one goal in mind: to study the Epoch of Reionization (EoR). This is the period when the formation of first stars happened, named after what happened to hydrogen during this time.About 380,000 years after the Big Bang, the universe was finally cool enough for the protons and electrons to form hydrogen atoms. Over hundreds of millions of years (the so-called cosmic dark ages), hydrogen gathered in clouds until it eventually collapsed into the first stars. The light of the first stars was so intense that it stripped the electrons from the hydrogen (a process called ionization), for the second time in the history of the universe."Defining the evolution of the EoR is extremely important for our understanding of astrophysics and cosmology," lead author Dr Nichole Barry, from the University of Melbourne, said in a statement. "So far, though, no one has been able to observe it. These results take us a lot closer to that goal."The team is looking at a specific emission of neutral hydrogen known as the 21-centimeter line. The signal is difficult to capture as it is very weak and there are a lot of other galaxies and objects between its sources and us.The team collected 21 hours of raw data from the observatory and applied novel techniques to refine the analysis. Part of the focus was to make sure that potential sources of contamination (including signals from Earth) where detected and excluded with high accuracy. The result significantly improves what we know about this mysterious epoch."We can't really say that this paper gets us closer to precisely dating the start or finish of the EoR, but it does rule out some of the more extreme models," added co-author Professor Cathryn Trott, from the International Centre for Radio Astronomy Research at Curtin University in Western Australia. "That it happened very rapidly is now ruled out. That the conditions were very cold is now also ruled out."Future observatories will be able to study the first generation of stars better and help answers the many mysteries left to solve. These first stars are expected to be hundreds, if not thousands, of times the size of our Sun and when they went supernova they may have even produced the seeds for the supermassive black holes now found at the core of galaxies. 
Artist depiction of the Vikram lander. Shutterstock/RaymondCasselSo far only three countries have successfully landed on the Moon: Russia, the United States, and China. Israel's Beresheet lander attempted to do so back in April, but was ultimately unsuccessful and ended up leaving thousands of tiny tardigrades on the Moon's surface. This weekend it was India's turn to attempt a lunar landing to explore the South Pole, and while the situation is still developing, it doesn’t look too good.India has confirmed the Vikram lander has been spotted by its lunar orbiter, Chandrayaan-2. The lander appeared to have touched down intact on the surface of our natural satellite but it was a hard landing. According to the Indian Space Research Organization (ISRO), it seems that Vikram is tilted, a possible consequence of whatever happened in the last moments of the final descent. It was designed to safely land on slopes of up to 12 degrees, but it is unclear at this moment if that limit has been breached.Dr K. Sivan, the director of ISRO, confirmed in an announcement that Vikram stopped communicating when it was about 2.1 kilometers (1.3 miles) from the surface of the Moon on Friday, September 6. It ended up just 500 meters (1,640 feet) from the planned landing site.   "Vikram lander descent was as planned and normal performance was observed up to an altitude of 2.1 kilometers," Sivan said. "Subsequently the communications from the lander to the ground station was lost. The data is being analyzed."Sivan told the Times of India on Saturday, September 8, the mission would continue to try contacting the lander for 14 days."It had a hard-landing very close to the planned (touch-down) site as per the images sent by the on-board camera of the orbiter. The lander is there as a single piece, not broken into pieces. It's in a tilted position," an ISRO spokesperson stated, reports India Today. "We are making all-out efforts to see whether communication can be re-established with the lander."The team appears to be optimistic about chances of re-establishing contact with the lander, but the hope rests on the assumption that nothing got broken in the landing. It's expected to have plenty of power either from its solar panels and batteries. A crucial issue is if the antenna is no longer pointing at either the ground station or the orbiter.The lander's name, Vikram, means Valour. It's is named after Vikram Sarabhai, who is widely regarded as the founder of the Indian Space program. It was expected to work for an entire lunar day (equivalent to 14 days) and to release its rover, Pragyan, which means wisdom. The lander has a suite of instruments to study seismic activity, temperature, and the plasma that forms on the surface of the Moon.The lander and rover duo are just one part of the Chandrayaan-2 mission, the first to aim to explore the South Pole region of the Moon. The spacecraft was launched last July 22. It will continue its mission of mapping the lunar surface as well as exploring its chemical composition of the presence of water.
This artist’s concept depicts the early Martian environment (right) – believed to contain liquid water and a thicker atmosphere – versus the cold, dry environment seen on Mars today (left). NASA’s Goddard Space Flight CenterMars used to be very different from how it is today. Forget the red frigid desert and imagine flowing water and active volcanos. However, the planet's past climate is still unclear and we're also not sure about the density of its atmosphere. A clever way to track how much atmosphere the Red Planet used to have is to look at the level of oxygen. Mars' atmosphere is mostly carbon dioxide and researchers are interested in the oxygen in these molecules. Oxygen can be found mainly in two forms, or isotopes, oxygen-16 (which has eight protons and eight neutrons in its nucleus) and oxygen-18, which has two extra neutrons. This is a good tracer for atmospheric loss because oxygen-16 is lighter and more easily escapes into space.But in science, nothing is very straightforward. Different missions studying the Red Planet have discovered that the ratio between the two isotopes of oxygen is not consistent. But the fault is not in the measurements. As reported in Icarus, it’s the actual atmosphere that is changing.Measurements at noon local time showed that the ratio between the two forms of oxygen was about 9 percent depleted in heavier isotopes. Measurements taken at 1.30pm showed that the air was enriched by 8 percent more oxygen-18 than we'd see in normal Earth oxygen ratios. This is the first measurement to show the variation using only a single method and it also shows correlations with surface temperature.“Our measurements suggest that the previous work all may have been done correctly but disagreed because this aspect of the atmosphere is more complex than we had realized,” lead author Timothy Livengood of the University of Maryland said in a statement. “Depending where on Mars the measurement was made, and what time of day on Mars, it is possible to get different values.”While the complexity is a roadblock to a detailed estimate of the Martian past, it does tell us that there are no unexpected phenomena stealing away certain isotopes while leaving others behind. The models will have to be refined but they don’t have to be overhauled.
You can see the dust on the left billowing up from the ice and rocks falling 500 meters down a cliff near Mars's North Pole. NASA/JPL/University of ArizonaNASA’s Mars Recoinnosance Orbiter (MRO) managed to catch a very cool event on camera near the North Pole of Mars. The spacecraft captured an avalanche raising a big red dust cloud in May this year using its incredible HiRISE (High-Resolution Imaging Science Experiment) camera.What we are seeing here is the aftermath of loose ice blocks tumbling down a 500-meter (1,640-foot) cliff face, kicking up dust from the thawing terrain underneath. The region is just 370 kilometers (230 miles) from the Martian North Pole.“Every spring the sun shines on the side of the stack of layers at the North Pole of Mars known as the north polar layered deposits. The warmth destabilizes the ice and blocks break loose,” Candy Hansen, from the University of Arizona, explains on the HiRISE website.The image was snapped when MRO was just 318.2 kilometers (197.8 miles) in altitude and it has a resolution of 32 centimeters (about a foot) per pixel. Objects less than a meter (about 3 feet) are resolved in this image. The image itself is 1 kilometer (0.6 miles) across.While capturing an avalanche is an extraordinary and serendipitous event to observe, the thawing of the polar cap is perfectly normal. Mars's seasons last twice as long as their counterparts on Earth and since March, the Red Planet's northern hemisphere has been enjoying its springtime. Spring, however, will be coming to an end soon with the summer solstice happening on October 8.Mars is the most studied planet in the Solar System, other than Earth. Thanks to our many robotic observers we have been able to further our understanding of its complexity over the many decades of exploration. Despite this, it continues to surprise us, especially when we have a chance to capture something unique like this avalanche.
This visible-light image of the Fireworks galaxy (NGC 6946) comes from the Digital Sky Survey, and is overlaid with data from NASA's NuSTAR observatory (in blue and green). ULX-4 is the green blob towards the middle of the galaxy. NASA/JPL-CaltechNASA’s telescope NuSTAR is designed to spot energetic X-ray lights coming from the cosmos. These signals often come from supernovae and supermassive black holes but a team of researchers has recently found one without a straightforward explanation.When looking at the Fireworks galaxy (also known as NGC 6946), they discovered a transient event that appeared and disappeared over less than three weeks. The green blob in the main image wasn’t there in the first set of observations; it suddenly appeared in the second set, which was conducted 10 days later. When the researchers checked again after another 10 days, the signal had gone for good.The observations are reported in The Astrophysical Journal and were part of a wider investigation of NGC 6946’s ultra-luminous X-ray sources (ULX). Three have been known to exist in the galaxy and the flash-in-the-pan event is the fourth one, named ULX-4. The team also used ESA's XMM-Newton telescope and NASA's Chandra."Ten days is a really short amount of time for such a bright object to appear," lead author Hannah Earnshaw, a postdoctoral researcher at Caltech in Pasadena, California, said in a statement. "Usually with NuSTAR, we observe more gradual changes over time, and we don't often observe a source multiple times in quick succession. In this instance, we were fortunate to catch a source changing extremely quickly, which is very exciting."The researchers are pretty confident that ULX-4 was not a supernova given that they couldn’t find the specific visible light signature for such an event coming from the same region. In their study, the team proposes two explanations, and both have to do with matter accumulating on extremely compact objects.One possibility is that the team caught a black hole disrupting a star. The gravity near a black hole is high enough to break objects apart and as they spiral inwards towards the black hole they are heated up by extreme forces. The disrupted material can easily reach millions of degrees, emitting bright X-rays.The second scenario sees a neutron star being the compact object in question. These objects are what remain after certain stars go supernova. They have a mass larger than the Sun packed into a sphere not much larger than a big city. They also have incredible magnetic fields that often trap matter into columns funneling material down to the surface.But in certain cases, the material cannot reach the surface. Some neutron stars spin hundreds of times per second and this acts as a barrier to the material falling towards the star. The authors describe it as jumping on a carousel that is spinning at thousands of miles per hour.But it is possible that the magnetic field changed for a brief time and that was enough for matter to come barging in, hitting the surface, and emit a burst of X-rays.
Artist’s impression of a binary system with a pulsar, gravity bending space-time. ESO/L. CalçadaPulsars are incredible heavenly bodies. They are neutron stars just 20 kilometers (12 miles) in diameter that pack more mass than our Sun. Their defining characteristic though is the beam of radio waves that they emit along their magnetic axis, which makes them appear to pulsate as they spin.The pulsation of pulsars has been used to test predictions of general relativity in the past, but a particular system, PSR J1906+0746, has given researchers a new testing ground. This system sports not one but two pulsars orbiting each other every four hours – and these characteristics are key to seeing the relativistic effects.The theory of general relativity explains the laws of gravity and its relation to other forces, describing gravity as a geometric property of space and time. Einstein said that anything with mass warps space-time, and that distortion, or warp, is what we see as gravity. In this system, the two objects are so dense and so close to each other, that the geometry of the system changes over time. The direction of the magnetic axis, where the pulsation comes from, is said to experience precession, a change in orientation of the axis of a rotating body, over time.As reported in the journal Science, researchers have been tracking the pair for years. The team looked at data between July 2005 and June 2018 and discovered that the changes are already happening. Back in 2005 two pulses per rotation were visible. Over time, one of them became consistently weaker, disappearing completely in 2016.The team was able to measure the rate of the precession with only 5 percent of uncertainty, much higher than previous examples of binary pulsar systems. The value obtained in this study agrees with the prediction of Einstein’s theory.“Pulsars can provide tests of gravity that cannot be done in any other way,” co-author Ingrid Stairs from the University of British Columbia in Vancouver, said in a statement. “This is one more beautiful example of such a test.”The team's 14-year-long study is not just a look at the past but also at the future. The second pulse is currently still visible, but it won’t be forever. Researchers expect it to disappear from the line of sight around 2028. It will be showing up again between 2070 and 2090. The other beam should also reappear in a similar timeframe between 2085 and 2105.The data collected was also used by the team to look at the physical properties of pulsars. Neutron stars are some of the most extreme objects but they are still poorly understood. The research provides some important observations of the radio emissions just above the magnetic poles of the pulsar.“PSR J1906+0746 is a unique laboratory in which we can simultaneously constrain the radio pulsar emission physics and test Einstein’s general theory of relativity,” said Gregory Desvignes from the Max Planck Institute for Radio Astronomy (MPIfR) in Bonn, the first author of the study.
HR 5183b (top left with its orbit faintly shaded) as it would appear if it orbitted the Sun. If it did, however, all the Sun's actual planets would have long since been destroyed or thrown into deep space. Andrew Howard/CaltechThe planets we know best have almost circular orbits. Paths stretched to run from the inner Solar System to the icy outer reaches are restricted to small asteroids, and particularly comets. So astronomers were surprised to discover a planet with at least three Jupiter masses orbiting a star in a very elongated orbit.On average HR 5183b orbits its sun-like star at a distance just less than Uranus’ from the Sun, but like the proverbial economist with feet in an icebox and head in an oven, averages can deceive. If superimposed on the Solar System, HR 5183b would voyage from the asteroid belt to beyond Neptune.A perfectly round orbit has zero eccentricity, while anything above 1 means an unbound visitor like 'Oumuamua. Some comets have eccentricities of 0.99, but Mars is the highest of the Solar System's planets at 0.09, unless you count Pluto's 0.25.The average eccentricity for planets that are part of multiple systems is just 0.04, but one estimate is that where a star has only one companion the average is 0.32. Even so, HR 5183b’s eccentricity of 0.84 is exceptional."This planet is unlike the planets in our solar system, but more than that, it is unlike any other exoplanets we have discovered so far," said Dr Sarah Blunt, who recently graduated from Caltech, in a statement.Blunt's identification of HR 5183b’s eccentricity has been accepted in the Astronomical Journal (preprint available to read on ArXiv.org).Almost all the planets we have found were detected using methods that favor those close to their star. Finding planets using the “Doppler wobble” method, for example, involves tracking them for at least a complete orbit.However, HR 5183b takes an estimated 74 years to return to its starting position, and we have less than 30 years of observations of its parent star. However, the extraordinary nature of HR 5183b’s orbit allowed astronomers to find it in that time. "This planet spends most of its time loitering in the outer part of its star’s planetary system in this highly eccentric orbit, then it starts to accelerate in and does a slingshot around its star," explained co-author Professor Andrew Howard. "We detected this slingshot motion. We saw the planet come in and now it's on its way out. That creates such a distinctive signature that we can be sure that this is a real planet, even though we haven't seen a complete orbit." No planet has previously been found on such a long orbit using this method.The finders propose HR 5183b once had a companion of similar mass and their interactions created the extraordinary orbit, destroying the other planet. In the process any smaller planets would have been annihilated, leading Howard to compare it to a wrecking ball.
The European Space Agency conducted the first-ever “collision avoidance maneuver” with a privately owned satellite. ESA/TwitterSpaceX has stated that a “bug” in its system prevented operators from changing the course of one of its Starlink satellites after experts attempted to communicate a potential collision with another satellite, resulting in the European Space Agency (ESA) conducting the first-ever “collision avoidance maneuver” with a satellite from the new breed of "mega-constellation" satellites.  In a slew of tweets, the space agency confirms that its Aeolus Earth observation satellite fired its thrusters in order to avoid a collision with the SpaceX satellite in their Starlink constellation, a mega-constellation of 60 satellites launched earlier this year in hopes of providing ultrafast Internet access.  “Experts in our space debris team calculated the risk of collision between these two active satellites, determining the safest option for Aeolus would be to increase its altitude and pass over the SpaceX satellite,” wrote ESA in a tweet.The maneuver took place about a half an orbit before the collision would have happened. Shortly after, Aeolus sent science data back indicating the maneuver was a success. The agency notes that “it is very rare to perform collision avoidance maneuvers with active satellites. The vast majority of ESA avoidance maneuvers are the result of dead satellites or fragments from previous collisions.”In a statement seen by Jonathan O'Callaghan reporting for Forbes, SpaceX said that their last communication with the Aeolus operations team was on August 28 when the probability of collision was “well below the industry standard threshold” at which point both SpaceX and ESA determined that a maneuver was not necessary. In the days that followed, the US Air Force updates increased the risk of collision to 1-in-10,000 but a “bug” in SpaceX's paging system prevented the Starlink operator from “seeing the follow-on correspondence on this probability increase.”“SpaceX is still investigating the issue and will implement corrective actions,” SpaceX said. “However, had the Starlink operator seen the correspondence, we would have coordinated with ESA to determine [the] best approach with their continuing with their maneuver or our performing a maneuver.”Last year, 28 collision avoidance maneuvers were conducted by ESA, but experts warn that as the number of satellites in orbit increases, hundreds or even thousands of satellites may be compromised. Such maneuvers are currently conducted manually and take a good deal of preparation, but the agency says that it is preparing to automate the process using artificial intelligence. Current estimates suggest that all the debris in Earth’s orbit weighs more than 8,400 tonnes. 
This small stone is among the most unusual meteorites ever found, one that came from the core of a destroyed planet and holds minerals never before seen in nature. Museum VictoriaIn the 1950s geologists realized a meteorite found near Wedderburn in Australia had a composition like no other. Decades later a mineral never before known to occur naturally has been found in a slice taken from this rarity and the race is on to learn what this can tell us about a planet blasted apart in the early days of the Solar System.The Wedderburn meteorite has proportionally more nickel (24 percent) than any meteorite ever seen. Moreover, it has an unusually high carbon concentration for an iron-nickel meteorite, although far lower than other types.This composition alone suggests the material was once part of the core of a planet. Dr Stuart Mills of Museums Victoria told IFLScience this has been confirmed by some of the minerals within it, which require the high pressures of a planetary core to form without human assistance.Although rare such rocks exist because, in the early days of the Solar System, some partially formed planets slammed into each other with such force both broke apart, scattering fragments from their cores across the inner Solar System. These items, like the more common meteorites with less exotic origins, have been wandering through space for 4.5 billion years before touching down on Earth.Planetary scientists are keen to learn why the Wedderburn meteorite has more nickel and carbon than its counterparts, and what this says about the planet from which it came. Dr Chi Ma of Caltech has raised the stakes further by finding an iron carbide with the formula Fe5C2 and distinctive structure in the meteorite’s heart.In American Mineralogist Ma names the new mineral edscottite after Professor Ed Scott, a meteorite expert whose PhD was on the Wedderburn meteorite.Edscottite was first seen as a stage in the process of making steel. Chinese scientists have recently explored using the nanoparticles of the same material to improve tumor tracing. The molecules preferentially bind to cancer cells and make them visible to MRIs and other scanners, and therefore easier to target for treatment.By tradition, minerals only get a name when found in nature – humans have found so many more ways of finding elements than we have discovered existing naturally that those we create ourselves are referred to by their formulae.Having started at just 210 grams (7 ounces) and now lost much of its material for study the Wedderburn is so small the museum doesn’t want to cut its precious stone any further. Instead, it is appealing for some of the slices taken in the 1950s, now scattered in laboratories around the world, to be returned, and hopes these will satisfy planetary scientists seeking more natural edscottite.Mills told IFLScience meteorites break up in the atmosphere, and where there is one there are almost always others of the same composition. Naturally, the museum would love to get its hands on these. Iron meteorites oxidize in wet climates but it is thought the meteorite struck the Earth around 800 years ago, and even another 70 years should not have destroyed other fragments.The museum was recently presented with a large meteorite from the same region that a fossicker initially thought was a gold nugget. That one was special for its size, but even a few grams of natural edscottite would be a much greater prize.
Venus as seen by Akatsuki. Used with permission via Damia Bouic. Credit JAXA/ISAS/DARTS/Damia Bouic, CC BY-NC-SA 3.0Venus is a hellish toxic world, with a surface under high pressure and temperatures hot enough to melt lead and zinc. Venus's thick clouds and strange weather has fascinated scientists for decades, and now a particular feature in one has been revealed to have a big effect on the other.Unlike on Earth, most solar radiation is absorbed by the higher clouds of Venus. Within those clouds, there are strange dark patches made up of a mysterious substance, which scientists call an “unknown absorber” because it absorbs certain specific ultraviolet light from the Sun. The absorber is not evenly distributed and these variations create hotter regions in the atmosphere, which affects both local areas as well as the large-scale global circulation of clouds. In a study published in The Astronomical Journal, astronomers show that these patches of unknown absorber are affecting Venus's weather.The team used several years of data collected between 2006 and 2017 by Venus Express, Akatsuki, MESSENGER, and the Hubble Space Telescope and discovered a change in the albedo, the ratio between the light reflected and light absorbed by a surface. The albedo of the clouds varied roughly by a factor of two around the planet over those 11 years. According to models, this might have produced changes in heat by up to 40 percent at the lower latitudes of Venus. They concluded these variations changed the movement of clouds around the planet.“It is hard to conceive of what would cause a change in the albedo without a change in the absorbers,” co-author Sanjay Limaye, a planetary scientist at the University of Wisconsin-Madison, told Erica Naone at Astronomy.com.The change in the absorbers perplexed astronomers. Not knowing what they're made of, the team has struggled to understand what processes are driving their changes. They proposed several mechanisms, from cosmic rays to regular changes in the solar activity, to different amounts of sulfur dioxide.A more outlandish hypothesis has the absorbers actually being of biological origin. While the surface of Venus is hellish, the cloud-top is mild enough to possibly sustain life. This idea has been kicking about since the late 1960s and last year, Limaye and colleagues took a serious look at this possibility.Limaye suggested to IFLScience at the time that simulating the condition seen in the clouds of Venus in greater detail from the comfort of the lab – in particular NASA’s Glenn Extreme Environments Rig – might deliver some much-needed answers regarding the true nature of the unknown absorbers of Venus, before we go there ourselves.
The impact crater that the strange colored gel substance was spotted in. China Lunar Exploration Project China’s Chang’e-4 lunar rover has discovered an unusually colored “gel-like” substance with a “mysterious lustre” on the far side of the Moon, researchers from the China Lunar Exploration Project have revealed.Chang’e-4’s rover, Yutu-2, has been slowly pottering around the lesser-known side of the Moon since the mission's historic landing back in January. In nine months, the rover has covered a total of 271 meters (890 feet), exploring craters, while the lander has sent back spectacular – and of course, unprecedented – views from the far side of the Moon.On July 28, three days after the start of lunar day 8 (lunar days last 29 Earth days, so Yutu-2 is experiencing two weeks of "day" and two weeks of "night"), Yutu-2 was about to be powered down for a “midday nap” to avoid overheating, as when the Sun is directly overhead, Moon surface temperatures can reach more than 100°C (212°F).However, while surveying a panoramic of the crater the rover had just been exploring, something curious caught mission member Yu Tianyi’s eye. It was enough to postpone Yutu’s nap, and even postpone existing plans to travel west, instead rolling it back to the crater for a second look.There, to the team’s surprise, they spotted what they have described as a gel with a mysterious lustre and a shape and color significantly different from the surrounding soil.Yutu-2 has since scanned the crater using its Visible and Near-Infrared Spectrometer (VNIS), which detects light reflected off materials to get an understanding of their chemical make up, and though Chinese scientists haven’t revealed any more information about what they may have found (or released a photo), experts have weighed in at what they think this anomaly could be.According to Space.com, scientists not involved in the project suggest the material could be glass, formed by meteorites hitting the surface of the Moon with such force it melts the Moon rock.While undertaking this new and exciting detour, Yutu-2 traveled 1.96 meters (6.4 feet), breaking its own record for number of steps taken in a day: three! Don't laugh, that is the fastest it's ever moved, and leaves its predecessor, Yutu, in the dust at a paltry total of 114 meters (374 feet) after it short-circuited and became immobile just two months into its mission. Yutu, meaning Jade Rabbit, is named after the pet belonging to the moon goddess Chang'e, in Chinese mythology. On January 3, 2019, Chang'e-4 completed the first-ever soft landing on the far side of the Moon, landing in the Von Kármán Crater in the southern hemisphere. Since then, the mission has sprouted the first plant on the far side of the Moon, discovered lunar night is much colder than we had thought, and possibly discovered the first-ever sample of material originating from the Moon's mantle. Both Chang'e-4 and Yutu-2 have just woken up for lunar day 9, and during this time Yutu-2 will continue its journey west (you can follow its "driving diary" here), where it will hopefully reveal more of the mysterious side of the Moon's secrets. 
Artist's composition of what the possible moon of WASP-49b is like. University of Bern/Thibaut RogerThousands upon thousands of extrasolar planets have been discovered in the last two decades, expanding our knowledge of how solar systems form. What we are yet to confirm is the presence of an exomoon, a smaller body orbiting one of these planets. We've seen hints with some candidate objects and now there is one more. It’s quite peculiar.Researchers led by a team at the University of Bern have uncovered evidence that points to the existence of a volcanic exomoon, similar in behavior to Io, the volcanic moon of Jupiter. This possible moon is in the WASP-49 system, 640 light-years away. The system sports one known exoplanet, WASP-49b, a gas giant slightly smaller than Jupiter.The planet orbits the yellow dwarf star in just three days, which makes it a pretty hot and tightly bound system. In a paper accepted for publication in The Astrophysical Journal and currently available on ArXiv, the team argues that this is key. The strong gravitational tides could keep a moon's orbit stable and make it volcanically active. Tidal heating is also what keeps Io's volcanos going.The Jovian moon and Jupiter itself are the analogous system that the team used to try to work out what volcanically active exomoons might look like. By studying the emission of potassium and sodium between Io and the gas giant, they have uncovered some important patterns. Volcanic moons seem to be a lot more efficient at throwing these elements into space compared to gas giants.When these observations are applied to the WASP-49 system, a volcanic exomoon becomes a very appealing and quite likely scenario. The researchers have found such impressive similarities that they are dubbing the potential exomoon an “exo-Io”.“The neutral sodium gas is so far away from the planet that it is unlikely to be emitted solely by a planetary wind,” lead author Dr Apurva Oza said in a statement. “Sodium and potassium lines are quantum treasures to us astronomers because they are extremely bright. The vintage street lamps that light up our streets with yellow haze, is akin to the gas we are now detecting in the spectra of a dozen exoplanets.”
The asteroid with two narrow, comet-like tails of debris tell us that the asteroid is slowly undergoing self-destruction. NASA, ESA, K. Meech and J. Kleyna, O. HainautFor the first time, astronomers have observed an active asteroid changing color in real time from red to blue in the near-infrared spectrum as it undergoes self-destruction more than 322 million kilometers (200 million miles) away from Earth.An out-of-this-world image captured by the Hubble Space Telescope shows the asteroid 6478 Gault with two narrow tails and bright streaking stars in the background in the asteroid belt between Mars and Jupiter. Scientists at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) say this type of behavior from an asteroid is typical of comets but incredibly rare for their rocky asteroid cousins.“That was a very big surprise,” said Michael Marsset, a postdoc in MIT’s Department of Earth, Atmospheric and Planetary Sciences, in a statement. “We think we have witnessed the asteroid losing its reddish dust to space, and we are seeing the asteroid’s underlying, fresh blue layers.”Measuring about 4 kilometers (2.5 miles) wide, Gault is mainly made up of a dry, rocky material called silicate. It is believed that the color shift is due to dust shedding off the planet as the asteroid becomes unstable. Typically, as sunlight heats an asteroid, infrared radiation escapes from its surface with angular momentum, which causes the asteroid to spin faster and faster. As this happens, the object becomes unstable and landslides release dust and rubble into space. Scientists aren’t exactly sure why the asteroid is behaving like a comet. Asteroids are mostly made of metals and rocky materials whereas comets contain dust and ice that typically kick up their well-known tails.“It’s the first time to my knowledge that we see a rocky body emitting dust, a little bit like a comet,” Marsset added. “It means that probably some mechanism responsible for dust emission is different from comets and different from most other active main-belt asteroids.”
The bands on Saturn are much more subtly colored than Jupiter's but they still indicate the presence of very rapid winds, occasionally complicated by storms like this one. However, Cassini revealed the winds stop about 15 percent of the way to Saturn's center. NASA/JPL-Caltech/SSIAs the Cassini spacecraft plunged to its doom it reported a sharp drop off in Saturn’s hectic winds with depth. This initially puzzling observation has now been explained as a consequence of the planet’s interior being viscous, which in turn is a consequence of the warping of its magnetic field.Saturn is a gas giant, composed of hydrogen and helium rather than solid materials like the Solar System's rocky inner planets. Although it lacks the distinct coloring of Jupiter, the outer parts of the planet are composed of jet streams, circling the planet at speeds of up to 1,800 kilometers (1,100 miles) per hour.After 13 wonderful years of studying Saturn, its moons and rings, Cassini did a final dive into the planet as its last act of service to humanity, sending back a wealth of data before it was crushed by the intense pressure. “The measurements revealed that these jet streams continue about 8,500 kilometers inside Saturn, which is roughly 15 percent of the distance towards the planet’s center,” said Dr Navid Constantinou of the Australian National University in a statement. Beneath this the movement stops. Planetary scientists have sought to explain this unexpected finding, and Constantinou has published what he thinks is the answer in Physical Review Fluids. “Deep into Saturn, where the pressure is high, the gas becomes a liquid that conducts electricity and is more strongly influenced by the planet’s magnetic field,” Constantinou said. “Beyond certain depths the pressure is so high the electrons break loose from the hydrogen molecules and are allowed to move freely," he added to IFLScience. "Electrons moving freely create currents. Beyond those depths we say that ‘the fluid becomes conducting’, i.e., it can carry electric currents and, consequently, can be affected by magnetic fields.”According to Constantinou, the jet streams bend the magnetic field lines, and the distorted fields make Saturn more viscous at depth, in other words, more like slowly flowing honey than swift-moving water. Constantinou says the estimates are still imprecise, but deep inside Saturn, the viscosity is millions, probably hundreds of millions, of times greater than anything you'd put on pancakes.
Mosaic of best-resolution images of Pluto from different angles. NASA/JHUAPL/SwRIAugust 24 is a very sad day in the hearts of an especially loyal and dogged sect of Pluto groupies. On this day in 2006, Pluto was demoted from a planet to a dwarf planet, sparking a debate that continues to bubble up in comment sections to this day. But on the eve of “Pluto Demotion Day” this year, NASA Administrator Jim Bridenstine gave fresh hope to the pro-Pluto planet party, claiming that the mysterious icy oddball is actually a planet (at least in his opinion). “Just so you know, in my view, Pluto is a planet,” Bridenstine said at a FIRST Robotics event this morning in Oklahoma, broadcasted on NASA TV.“You can write that the NASA administrator declared Pluto a planet once again,” he joked.“I’m sticking by that, it’s the way I learned it and I’m committed to it.” Needless to say, this won’t settle the debate. When Pluto was first formally discovered by Clyde Tombaugh in 1930 it made headlines around the world and was promptly described as the “the ninth planet beyond Neptune.” If you’re older than 25 or so, chances are you would have been taught at school that Pluto is our Solar System's ninth planet. For one reason or another, Pluto also grew to become one of the most beloved bodies in the whole Solar System, hence why its fall from grace was so upsetting for some.In 2006 the International Astronomical Union (IAU) created a new definition for planets and Pluto did not fit the bill. The updated definition required a celestial body to tick three boxes before it can be called a planet. First, it must orbit around the Sun. Second, it must have sufficient self-gravity to make a round (or round-ish) shape. And last but not least, the body has to have cleared the neighborhood around its orbit. Since Pluto is surrounded by a flock of other icy Kuiper Belt objects similar to itself, it does not fit the definition and cannot be considered a true planet, merely a dwarf planet.After all, there are dozens of similar "Trans-Neptunian Objects" and celestial bodies that are comparable to Pluto that we don’t think of as planets. Eris, as just one example, is a near-spherical icy body that’s more massive than Pluto and only slightly smaller. The debate was refueled by the findings of NASA’s New Horizons probe flyby in 2015. Among its many discoveries about Pluto, the mission showed that Pluto and its satellites were much more complex than previously thought. Insights into Pluto’s surface and atmosphere further shook up the debate. So much so, Alan Stern, the planetary scientist who led the New Horizons mission, even co-authored a paper calling for a reclassification of Pluto as a planet. “[The IAU is] primarily made up of non-experts, astronomers who study black holes and galaxies [and so on],” Stern told IFLScience in 2017. “Other organizations [with planetary scientists] may be more appropriate.”The debate has continued to rage, however, and while Bridenstine's recent comments will be joyous news to many hardcore Pluto loyalists, they're unlikely to change much in the eye of the IAU.
Astronaut Anne McClain. Credit: NASA JohnsonHumans have been in space for 58 years and during this time, it has remained a relatively crime-free zone. But that could change.This weekend, The New York Times reported domestic troubles have sparked allegations of what could be the first crime committed in space if those charges are proved correct. Anne McClain is a decorated astronaut and one-half of the now-canceled all-female spacewalk (more on that later). She recently spent six months aboard the International Space Station (ISS), where it is reported she logged on to her estranged spouse's financial accounts. McClain has admitted she accessed a bank account belonging to Summer Worden, who she married in 2014 and is currently in the process of divorcing. But told the Times (via a lawyer) that she was only checking to see that the family's finances were healthy for the benefit of Worden's son, who the couple had raised together before the split.Worden has accused McClain of identify theft and improper access to her financial records. Meanwhile, Worden's parents claim McClain had accessed the accounts as part of a calculated and manipulative campaign to win custody of Worden's son.There does not appear to be any sign of funds being taken or moved from the account, but investigators from NASA's Office of Inspector General have spoken to both parties to try to find out exactly what happened. These allegations may be a first but the advent of extraterrestrial travel raises issues around criminal activity in space (and how to prosecute those activities back on Earth) – particularly as space tourism edges closer towards reality.As of right now, there are five space agencies connected to the ISS (the US, Russia, Canada, Japan, and Europe), each of which is subject to its own national (or, in the case of Europe, international) laws. However, there is a framework established for extradition processes, which technically allows a country to prosecute citizens from another country for any wrongdoing they commit in space. NASA told the Times it does not know of any crimes committed in space and so, at least for now, these legal structures haven't been tried out in practice.McClain was expected to be one half of the first all-female spacewalk, planned for earlier this year. However, this had to be canceled "in part" because there weren't enough suitably sized suits. Instead, Christina Koch made the trip with Nick Hague, while McClain remained inside the ISS (although she did perform a spacewalk on March 22). A spokesperson from NASA told the Times the cancellation had nothing to do with Worden's allegations and declined to comment any further on the case.[H/T: The New York Times ]
 diversepixel/ShutterstockEarth is a great place for life to survive and thrive. For starters, it has liquid water on its surface, it’s just the right distance from the Sun, has a protective atmosphere filled with gases, and it’s equipped with a magnetic field to shield us from dangers like solar flares.Surely, some might say, it must be an unbelievably rare occurrence to have such an ideal setting for life as we know it, even within the limitless bounds of the universe. However, this might not be the case.A new piece of research suggests that it’s likely other planets are out there with better conditions for life to thrive than those on Earth. As such, they could even have a greater variety of life than exists on Earth.Presenting their work in a Keynote Lecture at the Goldschmidt Geochemistry Congress in Barcelona, Dr Stephanie Olson of the University of Chicago explains how their team modeled likely conditions on different types of exoplanets using NASA-developed computer software to simulate the habitats that could theoretically exist on exoplanets. The work primarily focused on oceans since liquid water is essential for the kind of delicate chemistry that makes life possible (at least, based on our own planet’s lifeforms)."Life in Earth's oceans depends on upwelling (upward flow) which returns nutrients from the dark depths of the ocean to the sunlit portions of the ocean where photosynthetic life lives," Dr Olson said during their lecture at the Goldschmidt Geochemistry Congress. “More upwelling means more nutrient resupply, which means more biological activity. These are the conditions we need to look for on exoplanets."Scientists have previously hinted at the possibility that some exoplanets might have colossal continents and vast oceans, but we don’t yet have the technology to gather direct evidence of this. While that dream is still out of reach, for now this new research could help astronomers determine what kind of exoplanets to look for."We have used an ocean circulation model to identify which planets will have the most efficient upwelling and thus offer particularly hospitable oceans,” Olson continued. “We found that higher atmospheric density, slower rotation rates, and the presence of continents all yield higher upwelling rates. A further implication is that Earth might not be optimally habitable – and life elsewhere may enjoy a planet that is even more hospitable than our own.”Of course, this is all theoretical so far, but hey – I want to believe. 
ESAThe European Space Agency (ESA) says it wants humans to one day take long-term shelter in underground caves on the Moon.While the surface of the Moon has been explored, walked, and even golfed upon, relatively little is known about what lurks below the surface. ESA wants to explore beneath this surface, particularly pits that planetary geologists have suggested could be caused by the collapse of lava tubes when lava flowed under the surface over a billion years ago.The lunar maria (large, dark plains) were caused by huge flows of basaltic lava, almost exactly the same type you would see in Hawaii, that flooded out after impacts from various types of space rock.“Exploring and mapping these tubes could provide new information about the Moon’s geology, but they could also be an interesting option as long-term shelter for future human visitors to the Moon,” Francesco Sauro, director of ESA’s PANGAEA planetary geology astronaut training, said in a statement.“They would shield astronauts from cosmic radiation and micrometeorites and possibly provide access to icy water and other resources trapped underground.”NASA is exploring the idea, too. "This week our planetary scientists are in Hawaii, exploring lava tubes to better understand similar structures on the Moon and Mars," they wrote on Twitter. "These caves might contain evidence of ancient life on Mars or serve as shelters on the Moon."The agency has put out a call for ideas on how to explore areas under the lunar maria, and what else such missions could investigate. ESA say they're looking for ideas for missions beyond just how to access and navigate the caves, e.g. ways that a communication system between underground caves and the outside world could be established.“Mission concepts may be based on a single rover or a distributed system of satellite, robotic or rover systems that operate together,” Loredana Bessone, who is leading the hunt for ideas as head of analogue field testing and exploration training at ESA, said in a statement.
Car tracks last a long time in the Atacama Desert, a good proxy for Mars. Dr Armando Azua-BustosIf life once flourished on Mars and some survived the changing conditions, would it be able to move around the planet, finding new locations as old ones dry up? New evidence from the Atacama Desert provides a tentative yes.It's unlikely the best place for life on Mars today is the same as the best place a million, let alone a billion, years ago. So for microbes to have made it across the vast expanse of time between Mars' wet period and our robotic arrival, they probably needed the capacity to travel. However, it's not likely they could do this under their own steam, so something would need to have carried them, with wind the obvious candidate.In an effort to see if this is realistic, Dr Armando Azua-Bustos of Universidad Autónoma de Chile went to arguably the most Mars-like place on Earth, the Atacama Desert, to study how microbial migrations occur. There are much colder places on Earth, but none is as dry as the central Atacama, which can also match the Mars' mix of sand, rocks, and intense ultra-violet radiation.At six sites in the driest part of the Atacama, Azua-Bustos found 23 bacterial and eight fungal species. Moreover, some of these are particularly unlikely to be local in origin, including Oceanobacillus oncorhynchi, which as its name suggests is a marine bacterium. Other species appear to live on the plants that occupy the fog oases at the tops of hills in the desert's coastal fringe. There was surprisingly little overlap between the species found at different sites.The microscopic life forms reached these locations by catching a ride on wind-borne dust grains. Mars' atmosphere is 100 times thinner, but we know this is still enough to whip up vast dust storms that sometimes envelope the whole planet. Moreover, Azua-Bustos demonstrates in Scientific Reports that many microbes survive the UV exposure on route.Most of the life Azua-Bustos and co-authors found was carried by the prevailing winds from the Pacific ocean, arriving during the afternoon and dispersing through the desert the following morning. The fact that most of the movement happens in the late afternoon and night (when UV levels cease to be lethal) may play a big part in the capacity of the arriving life forms to flourish in the food dishes Azua-Bustos set out for them.
This Earth observation image was taken from the International Space Station and tweeted by astronaut Terry Virts to his followers with this comment: 'Sunset over the Med, Italy, Adriatic, and Alps.' Terry Virts/NASAThe universe isn’t just about us, you know? If there are any other intelligent lifeforms out there, they might too be searching the skies for distant exoplanets harboring like-minded creatures. Should they be extremely lucky, they might even come across planet Earth. But this begs the question, what would aliens see if they were studying our planet?A new study by the California Institute of Technology has used scientific methods to create "a two-dimensional alien map” showing how the Earth might appear if it was studied from a distant planet beyond our Solar System using technology similar to our own. You can read the full study, which hasn’t been peer-reviewed yet, on the pre-print server ArXiv.For starters, they collected around 10,000 images of Earth taken by the Deep Space Climate Observatory, an NOAA satellite that’s used to study space weather and observe Earth. They then compiled these images and used them to construct a map of Earth using only light curve observations and the planet's reflective properties, as if they had no knowledge of Earth’s features, such as its seas and landmasses.As you can see from the end product (below), their image essentially looks like an extremely vague picture of Earth, complete with subtle outlines that denote landmasses, seas, and cloud formations.Although scientists and science fiction writers suspected their existence for centuries, the first exoplanet was only detected in 1988. A few more were detected in the following years, and then came a boom of discovery. As of August 22, 2019, a remarkable 4,107 confirmed exoplanets are now listed in the Extrasolar Planets Encyclopaedia.One of the methods used by astronomers to detect these distant planets involves carefully studying the light beaming out of stars. If the starlight has a steady wobble, it suggests that a planet is orbiting around the star. This is because it shows the wavelengths of starlight are alternately squeezed and stretched as the star moves slightly closer, then slightly farther away from us, due to gravitational tugs from orbiting planets. Different gases and chemicals in the atmosphere absorb different wavelengths of light as it passes through, so we can also get a sense of what some exoplanets are made of and the composition of their atmosphere. More recently, it’s even become possible to directly image some exoplanets too.In theory, this new research could be used as a tool to find exoplanets with Earth-like features in the future. Astronomers are particularly keen to hunt down Earth-like exoplanets as it suggests they have a similar atmosphere and geology to us, meaning they could potentially be home to life.
Musk tweet over Mars. NASA/JPL/MSSSJust a few days ago, Musk took to Twitter to re-propose his idea of nuking Mars to warm up the Red Planet and eventually terraform it. He has now doubled down on those claims, clarifying his “vision” and adding a new possibility.Musk said in his tweet: “Might make sense to have thousands of solar reflector satellites [satellite emoji] to warm Mars vs artificial suns (tbd).”The idea of using mirrors to converge solar radiation is certainly not new. We can go back all the way to Archimedes and the mirrors he allegedly used against the Romans, or stick to a more Mars-related study. In 2006, then-undergraduate Rigel Woida looked at heating up a small area of Mars using a mirror 1.5 kilometers (almost a mile) across composed of 150 segments that are each 150 meters (492 feet) across.The mirrors would be made of mylar, a reflective material that is currently employed as a solar sail by the LightSail2 project. While the project had enough potential to get a $9,000 grant from NASA, it focused on warming a tiny area of Mars, roughly 1 square kilometer. (0.38 square miles). The surface of Mars is 144.8 million square kilometers (55.9 million square miles) – even a few thousand mirrors wouldn't cut it.Musk also clarified his idea of nuking Mars in reply to the mirror tweet: “Nuke Mars refers to a continuous stream of very low fallout nuclear fusion explosions above the atmosphere to create artificial suns. Much like our sun, this would not cause Mars to become radioactive.”This is different from the idea he touted a few years ago to liberate trapped CO2 from the Martian polar caps. Current hydrogen bombs (the nuclear fusion explosions he’s referring to) release nuclear fallout because their trigger is created either by uranium or plutonium. Sure, small explosive devices have a lower amount of fallout, but you would need a large number of these devices to constantly go off. And that’s just to mimic the amount of radiation Earth gets from the Sun.The underlying issue that's not being discussed is that while Musk throws around outlandish solutions to warm up Mars, there is still not a single one that would keep it warm. As far as scientists can tell, there is simply not enough carbon dioxide on Mars to create a greenhouse effect and keep the planet warm. Without an atmosphere, whatever solution they choose will have to be permanent.The mirrors will require constant refueling to continue to orbit Mars and not be pushed about by solar radiation. And if the nuclear explosion is more your style, you would have to constantly nuke the higher atmosphere of the Red Planet.
This artist's rendering shows NASA's Europa Clipper spacecraft, which is being developed for a launch sometime in the 2020s. NASA/JPLAn in-depth exploration of Europa, Jupiter’s icy moon believed to be home to a vast subsurface ocean, has been confirmed by NASA as the space agency prepares to launch its exploratory spacecraft Europa Clipper in the 2020s."We are all excited about the decision that moves the Europa Clipper mission one key step closer to unlocking the mysteries of this ocean world," said Thomas Zurbuchen, associate administrator for the Science Mission Directorate at NASA Headquarters, in a statement. "We are building upon the scientific insights received from the flagship Galileo and Cassini spacecraft and working to advance our understanding of our cosmic origin, and even life elsewhere."The search for water and oceanic conditions on other planets helps us understand the potential for life on other worlds. Following its launch, the radiation-tolerant spacecraft will orbit around Jupiter and conduct at least 45 close flybys of Europa at altitudes varying from 2,700 to 25 kilometers (1,675 to 16 miles) above the surface. The clipper will also fly by Jupiter’s two other large moons, Ganymede and Callisto.Europa presents some of the strongest evidence for an ocean of liquid water beneath its icy crust, conditions that would make the moon favorable for life. First discovered in 1610 by Galileo, scientists conducting ground-based telescope observations more than three centuries later in the 1960s found evidence that Europa’s surface composition is mostly water ice. Subsequent flybys and observations found large, linear band-like features across the moon that suggest icy material had seeped into cracks on the surface. The Galileo mission of the 1980s and 90s confirmed earlier findings, adding to them hints that Europa is creating its own magnetic field.But does that mean the icy moon has conditions suitable for life? To answer these questions, scientists are turning to the Europa Clipper, a spacecraft equipped with some serious scientific gear. Cameras and spectrometers will allow scientists to capture high-resolution images of Europa’s surface to determine the moon’s composition. Ice-penetrating radar will help determine the thickness of the moon’s shell and search for subsurface lakes similar to those found beneath Antarctica. A magnetometer will determine the strength and direction of Europa’s magnetic field, which in turn will lend clues to the depth and salinity of the ocean. Thermal instruments will also be used to find recent eruptions of warmer water, while other instruments will look for water and tiny particles in the thin atmosphere."This is a giant step in our search for oases that could support life in our own celestial backyard," said Europa program scientist Curt Niebur. "We're confident that this versatile set of science instruments would produce exciting discoveries on a much-anticipated mission."The Europa Clipper is set to launch as early as 2023, with a baseline commitment of 2025.
Artist’s impression of the β Pictoris system.  Rubini / AM LagrangeBeta Pictoris is an incredible laboratory for planetary scientists intrigued by the formation of planets. It is a young star at only 23 million years old (compared to the 5 billion years of our Sun), has a disk of debris around it, a belt of planetesimals, and evaporating exocomets. Not only that but two massive planets orbit the star.The discovery of the second planet, Beta Pictoris c, was recently announced in the journal Nature Astronomy. The planet was found thanks to 10 years' worth of observations conducted using the HARPS instrument on the Very Large Telescope."We talking [sic] about a giant planet about 3,000 times more massive than Earth, situated 2.7 times further from its star than the Earth is from the Sun," lead author Anne-Marie Lagrange, an astronomer at France's National Centre for Scientific Research, told AFP.The exoplanet is a super-Jupiter, weighing about nine times the mass of the gas giant in our solar system. The planet takes about 1,200 days to orbit Beta Pictoris, much shorter than its sibling. Beta Pictoris b is also a super-Jupiter (its mass is between nine and 13 times that of Jupiter's) but further out at roughly nine times the distance between the Earth and the Sun. In fact, Beta Pictoris b is the first exoplanet whose rotation rate has been measured, spinning on its axis in just 8.1 hours.Such characteristics are currently unknown for the second planet as more data is required to estimate its properties. The researchers also need to determine whether or not the current modeling of Beta Pictoris b’s properties and whole system dynamics need to be reinvestigated. The presence of such a massive planet is certain to have quite the influence.Some initial dynamical investigation reported in the study suggests the planetary system is stable. However, Beta Pictoris c might still influence the other planet’s eccentricity, making its orbit more or less circular over time.
Mars. NASA/JPL/MSSSPlanetary scientists still struggle to clearly define the climate history of Mars billions of years ago. Although there is evidence to suggest the planet's water was flowing freely on its surface, some models instead point to a frigid world where this water was trapped in ice form.Now, new findings based on Martian minerals, presented at the Goldschmidt Geochemical Conference in Barcelona, suggest the planet might have gone from a warm, wet period full of rainstorms to a colder one at some point between 3 and 4 billion years ago.“We know there were periods when the surface of Mars was frozen; we know there were periods when water flowed freely. But we don’t know exactly when these periods were, and how long they lasted. We have never sent unmanned missions to areas of Mars which can show us these earliest rocks, so we need to use Earth-bound science to understand the geochemistry of what may have happened there,” Professor Briony Horgan of Purdue University said in a statement.Professor Horgan's team looked at how mineral deposits are weathered on Earth in a variety of environments such as Hawaii, Oregon, and Iceland. Using these analogous deposits, they compared the data to that from NASA's CRISM spectrometer and Curiosity.   “Here on Earth, we find silica deposition in glaciers which are characteristic of melting water,"' said Horgan. "On Mars, we can identify similar silica deposits in younger areas, but we can also see older areas which are similar to deep soils from warm climates on Earth. This leads us to believe that on Mars 3 to 4 billion years ago, we had a general slow trend from warm to cold, with periods of thawing and freezing.”While geological data continues to point at a wet past for the Red Planet, climate models based on the Sun's heat suggest it must have been a more icy past. Billions of years ago, our star was dimmer and Mars wouldn’t have received enough radiation to maintain liquid water. Still, somehow it may have done so.“If our findings are correct, then we need to keep working on the Mars climate models, possibly to include some chemical or geological, or other processes which might have warmed the young planet,” said Horgan.
The Curiosity Rover has been cleared both of recording methane spikes that didn't exist, or releasing the methane itself. NASA/JPL-Caltech/MSSS edited Jeffrey BriefPlanetary scientists have been scratching their heads over apparent discrepancies between methane concentrations recorded by the Curiosity Rover and the ExoMars Trace Gas Orbiter. It was assumed that one must be wrong, but there was fierce disagreement over which. New research shows both readings were right; the differences represented the timing of their measurements.The news will be a great relief to those responsible for each machine, and is a necessary step towards finding whether the methane is a by-product of life or the result of some geological process.Curiosity has been recording spikes in methane concentration for years. On Earth methane is often, but not always, a by-product of methanogenic microbes so these have aroused great excitement. However, when the Orbiter didn’t record the same thing, speculation arose the detector was malfunctioning. There was even a theory Curiosity was releasing the methane it was reporting – smelling its own farts, one might say.However, York University Canada’s Dr John Moores noted Curiosity’s samples were taken in the middle of the night, while ExoMars measures in daylight, and wondered if there was a daily pattern, in addition to the previously identified annual cycle. Moores persuaded the Curiosity team to take readings just before dawn, and demonstrated his hunch was right.In Geophysical Research Letters Moores and Professor Penny King of the Australian National University fit the observations together. King explained to IFLScience that during the Martian day convection causes air to rise and the atmosphere to expand, before contracting again at night. “Earth’s atmosphere does the same,” she added, “but to a much lesser degree.” This phenomenon was well known, but no one else connected it to the methane measurements.The night-time atmospheric shrinkage concentrates the small amount of methane present in Mars’ atmosphere near the ground where Curiosity samples it, explaining its higher readings. King told IFLScience Curiosity took its measurements at night because many of its other functions only operate in daytime, so processes that can happen at any time are shunted to the hours of darkness to avoid interfering.Moores and King used the combined data from the two sets of measurements to calculate that Gale Crater, which Curiosity is exploring, is releasing 2.8 kilograms (6.2 pounds) of methane every Martian day. Given Gale’s 154-kilometer (100-mile) diameter, that’s a tiny but significant amount in the thin Martian atmosphere.
 ESO/L. Calçada.Over the last few years, researchers have discovered a treasure trove of rocky planets orbiting red dwarfs, small stars with a radius 60 percent smaller than our Sun. Despite their size, these stars are very active – so much so that many believe the planets around them may struggle to keep an atmosphere. Now, new research published in Nature strengthens this idea.A Harvard-led team of astronomers looked at 100 hours of observations of exoplanet LHS 3844b to identify signs of an atmosphere. They confidently ruled out a dense atmosphere (10 times what we have on Earth) and a less dense atmosphere. The model that best fits the data is a barren rocky planet, similar to Mercury but with a much hotter dayside pushing 770 °C ( over 1400 °F)."This is the very first time we've been able to say conclusively whether a terrestrial exoplanet has an atmosphere or not!" lead author Dr Laura Kreidberg, a Clay Fellow at the Center for Astrophysics, Harvard and Smithsonian, told IFLScience.  The planet has a radius about 1.3 times that of Earth's own and orbits a red dwarf named LHS 3844, located 48 light-years away in the constellation Indus in the southern sky. It was among the first exoplanets discovered by NASA’s Transiting Exoplanet Survey Satellite (TESS) after it launched last year.The planet orbits the star in 11 hours, being just 10 million kilometers (6.3 million miles) away from it. That’s about 7 percent of the distance between the Earth and Sun. Even though its star is much dimmer than our Sun, it gets a lot more radiation.The question now is if this new research is applicable to similar Earth-sized planets such as Proxima b or the TRAPPIST-1 planets that have been discovered over the last few years. These planets are further away from their stars than LHS 3844b. By being less irradiated, they might have better luck at maintaining their atmosphere against erosion from the stellar wind."It's hard to generalize from a sample of one. I would say that our result confirms theoretical predictions that hot terrestrial planets around M-dwarfs have a tough time holding onto their atmospheres," Dr Kreidberg explained. "We need to make this measurement for more planets, then we can take advantage of the big sample size of exoplanets to evaluate how often and under what circumstances they keep their atmospheres."
